
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (20 May 1822 – 12 June 1912) was a French economist and pacifist who was a founding member of several peace societies and the Inter-Parliamentary Union. He was also an author and politician, sitting in the Chamber of Deputies from 1881 until 1889. He was a joint winner of the Nobel Peace Prize in 1901 for his work in the European peace movement.Born in Paris to a prominent Catholic and Orléanist family, secondnameplaceholder was surrounded by military veterans and politicians. After training in law, he worked as an accountant and served in the National Guard. He soon left this position and began travelling around France giving lectures on economics. Following years of violent conflicts across Europe, secondnameplaceholder joined the peace movement in the 1850s, working with several notable activists and writers to develop journals, articles, and educational curricula.While sitting in the Chamber of Deputies, secondnameplaceholder developed the Inter-parliamentary Conference (later the Inter-Parliamentary Union) with British MP William Randal Cremer. Alongside this, he founded several peace societies: the Ligue Internationale et Permanente de la Paix, the Société Française des Amis de la Paix, and the Société Française pour l'Arbitrage entre Nations. secondnameplaceholder's work in the peace movement continued into his later years, and in 1901, he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize alongside Red Cross founder, Henry Dunant.secondnameplaceholder died in 1912 after a long period of illness and incapacitation. Despite his economic works gaining little traction, his efforts in the peace movement resulted in him being recognised as the "dean of European peace activists".[2][3]:34 His son, Paul secondnameplaceholder, published a memoir of his life in 1927, and his works are still being republished and translated into English in the 21st Century.
<h2>Family and early life</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was born in Paris in 1822 to an aristocratic Catholic family,[4]:41 which had strong ties to Orléanist politics.[4]:49His father, Justin Félix secondnameplaceholder, was a veteran of Waterloo.[5][4]:35 His paternal grandfather, Louis François secondnameplaceholder,[6]:5 had been Recevuer General des Finances (Receiver General of Finance), an important office in the Ancien Régime.[7]:222 His paternal grandmother was Jacquette Pauline Hélène d’Aure,[5] whose brother, the Count d'Aure, was a riding master who fought for France in Egypt and Saint-Domingue.[4]:35secondnameplaceholder's mother, Marie Louise Pauline Salleron, was from an aristocratic Parisian family.[5] His maternal great-grandfather, Joseph Salleron, was deputy mayor of the 6th arrondissement of Paris, and his maternal grandfather, Claude Louis Salleron, created a highly-profitable tanning business and was proposed as an officer in the National Guard in 1814.[7]:220–3After getting married in 1821, Félix secondnameplaceholder moved into the family home with Claude Louis Salleron. They went into business with each other and Félix eventually became an equal partner.[7]:222–3 firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's mother died in 1827, and in 1847, Félix married Irma Moricet, his son's widowed mother-in-law.[5][4]:59From 1846, secondnameplaceholder worked as an accountant in the Conseil de Droit.[8]:110 In 1848, he served in the National Guard.[4]:46 He resigned from his Conseil position in 1849 to start a career as an economist.[4]:37He was unable to secure a full-time position in education; he refused to swear the mandatory oath of loyalty to French monarch Napoleon III, believing his rule to be illegitimate.[3]:34 However, secondnameplaceholder published several books on economics during this time, the majority of them compiled from his lectures at universities in Pau, Montpellier, Bordeaux, and Nice.[4]:37secondnameplaceholder was trained in law, but soon became interested in moral and political economy. As he contemplated the effects of war, he was inspired by the works of several liberal economists and reformers: firstnameplaceholder Bastiat, Richard Cobden, and Daniel O'Connell.[4]:35 secondnameplaceholder was most impressed by Bastiat, who developed his ideas from Cobden's Anti-Corn Law League.[3]:22 Bastiat held the belief that the conscription and high tax which often accompanied militarism had a largely negative effect on the poor, and secondnameplaceholder further developed these ideas on class conflict throughout his work.[3]:26Being raised in a family of military veterans, secondnameplaceholder described in his autobiography how he "might easily have been drawn towards militarism". Instead, the stories about the horrors of the French conquest of Algeria pushed him to consider the effect that war had upon humanity.[4]:35 Years of violent discontent in Italy, Poland, and Austria and Prussia led to calls for a Europe federation from prominent liberals and socialists: Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, Émile de Girardin, secondnameplaceholder, and Michel Chevalier were all advocates of this idea. In 1859, secondnameplaceholder condemned the idea that military action could be a solution to political issues, suggesting instead that Europe should have a "permanent congress to oversee the general interests of humanity" and an international police force.[3]:32Recognising the importance of journalism in the fight for peace, he conceived a plan to create a journal devoted to "pacific propaganda". This led to him working with Edmond Potonié-Pierre on Le Courrier International (The International Mail), an English/French periodical devoted to the European peace movement.[4]:39 secondnameplaceholder's association with Potonié's Ligue du Bien Public (League of Public Good), a liberal and socialist group aimed at attacking monopolies and high taxation, ended when Potonié began to call for a sweeping change in social policy. He advocated for the separation of church and state, a free press, equality of the sexes, the abolition of the death sentence.[3]:32
<h2>League of Peace</h2>
In April 1867, the Paris newspaper Le Temps published three letters attacking the actions of the French concerning Luxembourg, the third of which was written by secondnameplaceholder. The letter invited readers to join a "peace league", and was given enthusiastic support by:[3]:33Henry Richard, secretary of the Peace Society, visited Paris in that year and urged the Minister of the Interior to allow an international peace congress during the 1867 Paris Exposition. The idea was rejected, but the government eventually allowed lectures on the general principles of peace go ahead, with the condition that no questions were asked afterwards.[3]:33–4In May 1867,[3]:34 secondnameplaceholder and Chevalier received permission to organize the Ligue Internationale et Permanente de la Paix (International and Permanent League of Peace).[9]:162 It was in the Ligue that secondnameplaceholder declared "war on war", believing that liberal economics would bring social change once military spending was eradicated. This differed greatly with the ideas of previous conservatives like Friedrich von Gentz, whose anti-war stance was concerned with maintaining the status quo.[3]:34On 21 May, secondnameplaceholder delivered a lecture at the École de Médecine (School of Medicine) in Paris, discussing his views on pacifism. He explained that his views were not from a religious or political perspective, but from an economic, moral, and philosophical one. While he did suggest that defensive or independence wars could be "the most noble and magnificent task in life", he strongly condemned wars of conquest and expansion as disadvantageous to a country's wealth and moral character.[3]:44–5In the same year, the French Saint-Simonian Charles Lemonnier founded a similarly-named League in Geneva.[3]:38 This group was far more political than secondnameplaceholder's, founded on republican views and strongly advocating for the separation of church and state.[9]:163 secondnameplaceholder made efforts to differentiate his Ligue from this one, repeating their "anti-revolutionary aims" and avoiding political questions over human rights.[3]:35Despite struggling to find adequate space for its 600 members, the Ligue held a meeting in June 1868 in which secondnameplaceholder gave a speech on the group's "anti-revolutionary" aims:The first large conflict to happen during the Ligue's existence was the Franco-Prussian War of 1870. After the Battle of Sedan and capture of Napoleon III, secondnameplaceholder pleaded with the Prussian royalty to remember "that you only made war to defend yourself, not to attack" and stop attacking the French people after the collapse of their government. He returned to Paris and attempted to convince the British and American embassies to provide neutral intervention in the conflict, even considering travelling by hot air balloon to the Prussian king himself. On the death of his brother-in-law in the Vosges, secondnameplaceholder left Paris once again, disheartened that the Ligue could not stop the war.[3]:43–4With secondnameplaceholder having adamantly renounced the earlier group, it is understandable that Edmond Potonié was one of the main opponents of the Ligue. He believed it not to be a serious peace society due to their vastly-differing opinions on the speed of change: he believed that only rapid societal change would bring about peace, whereas secondnameplaceholder's group advocated a calmer legalistic approach. Other protest against the Ligue came from religious groups, with Hyacinthe Loyson being denounced by the right-wing journalist Louis Veuillot as part of a "Protestant front": efforts to recruit more Catholics to the cause largely failed.[3]:34The Ligue received monetary support from notable liberals, such as John Stuart Mill (who joined on 4 August 1867)[9]:162 and Jean Dollfus. Subscription rates for its 600 members allowed the Ligue's treasury to have six thousand francs in 1868: founding members paid roughly one hundred francs, while associates paid five francs.[3]:34
<h2>The Society of Friends of Peace</h2>
After the Ligue's collapse following the Franco-Prussian War, peace activism in Europe gained a rejuvenation after the successful arbitrations between Britain and the United States in Geneva. Daniël van Eyk, Philip Johannes Bachiene, and Samuel Baart de la Faille founded a Dutch group on the ideas behind secondnameplaceholder's Ligue in 1871, and Masonic lodges began to undertake peace projects.[3]:45–6secondnameplaceholder noticed this renewed belief in peace, and in 1872 he began working on reviving the Ligue.[3]:46 He explained the two paths which society could take:He was aware that his favoured path, the latter, would not happen immediately or even in the near future, but set about creating a new French peace society to promote arbitration, the Société Française des Amis de la Paix (French Society of Friends of Peace).[3]:46Several other groups considering arbitration and the development of international law appeared during this time, including the Association pour la Réforme et le Codification du droit des gens (Association for the Reform and the Codification of the Law of the People; later the International Law Association) in 1873, which secondnameplaceholder and Henry Richard were involved in. The meetings, involving discussions on ways to reduce friction among different communities, were a way to enhance the conversations that secondnameplaceholder thought important for developing international co-operation.[3]:47–8Noticing the growth and popularity of the peace movement, members of the Société arranged a congress at the 1878 Paris Exposition, however they warned attendees not to raise "unpleasant" and provocative issues. 13 different nations were present among the 150 delegates, although 95 were from France.[3]:49 The congress was held across multiple days, involving a range of talks and speakers:The decade following the 1878 congress was a slow one for the Société, with Charles Richet noting that the meetings often consisted "only of secondnameplaceholder, Thiaudière and [himself]".[3]:52In 1889, secondnameplaceholder's Société merged with Hodgson Pratt's International Arbitration and Peace Association to form the Société Française pour l'Arbitrage entre Nations (French Society for Arbitration between Nations).[10]:137 This new Société lost its support in the 1890s to other groups, like the Association de la paix par le droit (Peace Through Law Association), which had been founded by a group of young Protestants.[10]:139
<h2>Political career</h2>
On 28 April 1873, secondnameplaceholder ran for the Marseilles seat in the Chamber of Deputies as an independent conservative republican against the radical Édouard Lockroy.[11] secondnameplaceholder lost with 17,000 votes compared to Lockroy's 54,000.[11] However, he was elected to the local council of Seine-et-Oise in 1874 and held the seat for twenty-four years.[4]:49In 1881, secondnameplaceholder was elected as the Deputy for the 8th arrondissement of Paris, beating a Bonapartist candidate.[4]:49 While in the Chamber, secondnameplaceholder continued to promote his views on peace. In October 1883, he led a discussion on the Tonkin campaign, attacking the government's imperialist policy and suggesting that the conflict be subject to arbitration. His position was met with ridicule and he left the chamber for an extended period of illness.[4]:45 He returned to the issue in December 1885, denouncing the colonialist actions of France amid the "remote prospect of any commercial results" coming from the conflict.[12] He criticised the government for affording rights to Alsace and Lorraine, but not to Tonkin and other colonies.[4]:45–6He often spoke against France's corn duties, and in support of free trade,[13] working alongside Finance Minister Léon Say to promote these free trade beliefs as part of the Association for the Defence of Commercial and Industrial Freedom.[14] None of secondnameplaceholder's initiatives within the chamber received legislative support, but his proposal that the state “take advantage of all favourable occasions to enter into negotiations with other governments to promote the practice of arbitration" was supported by 112 members from across vastly different parties.[4]:50secondnameplaceholder was re-elected to the Chamber in 1885.[3]:52 He ran again in 1889, and despite increasing his vote share in the weeks building up to the election, lost by 1,717 votes to Marius Martin.[15]In 1887, secondnameplaceholder and British MP William Randal Cremer petitioned their respective parliaments to support arbitration treaties between their country and the United States.[4]:50 secondnameplaceholder amassed 112 signatures from French parliamentarians, supported in his efforts by Jules Simon and Georges Clemenceau.[3]:56 A year later in November 1888, Cremer led a delegation of nine MPs to meet with twenty-five French Deputies to discuss working together. This meeting formed the first Inter-parliamentary Conference (later the Inter-parliamentary Union) in 1889, attended by prominent politicians like Léon Bourgeois and Jean Jaures, with secondnameplaceholder serving as president[4]:50–1
<h2>Writing career</h2>
secondnameplaceholder contributed to several different political magazines, including the feminist Revue de Morale Sociale (Review of Social Morale) and the literary-political Revue Politique et Littéraire (Political and Literary Review).[16] He published an autobiography in 1909, entitled Pour la paix: Notes et documents (For the Peace: Notes and Documents).[4]:57In 1877, secondnameplaceholder was accepted into the Académie de sciences morales et politiques (Academy of Moral and Political Sciences) for his works on political economy, and he was elected president of the Association française pour l’avancement des sciences (French Association for the Advancement of Sciences) in 1881.[4]:55 In his application to the Académie, secondnameplaceholder avoided using the word "peace" and instead wrote:secondnameplaceholder was aware of the importance of education in achieving peace, encouraging a textbook for nine-to-twelve-year-olds to be written. His group sponsored a prize essay in 1896 for this purpose. secondnameplaceholder and d'Estournelles de Constant worked together on a 1906 educational work, La Paix et L'enseignement pacifiste (Peace and Peace Education), and in 1909 released an entire curriculum entitled Cours d'Enseignement Pacifiste (Pacifist Teaching Course).[3]:79
<h2>Nobel Peace Prize</h2>
secondnameplaceholder's health had declined in old age, but he was still prominent and popular enough within the peace movement that it was assumed he would win the first Nobel Peace Prize. Public attention around the prize had increased to such a point that secondnameplaceholder was challenged to a duel by a man declaring that "the Nobel Prize does not belong to you", but nothing further came from the incident.[4]:53In December 1901, secondnameplaceholder was awarded half of the first Nobel Peace Prize, which was split with Henry Dunant, the founder of the Red Cross, and each received over 100,000 francs.[4]:54Being too elderly and ill to attend the ceremony in Christiania (now Oslo), neither secondnameplaceholder or Dunant delivered an acceptance speech. Instead, secondnameplaceholder wrote an article to be released posthumously, criticising Alfred Nobel's executors for using his money to create foundations he did not intend, and suggesting that the award could weaken the peace movement by attracting disingenuous money-seekers instead of peace-seekers. The article was published by the peace journal La Paix par le droit (Peace Through Law) in 1926.[4]:54 Despite secondnameplaceholder's objections, Professor of History Sandi E. Cooper notes, the prize money was most likely used to fund his peace activism.[3]:81
<h2>Final years</h2>
secondnameplaceholder continued to advocate for peace in his later years. In 1905, he attended the 14th Universal Peace Congress in Lucerne, during rising tensions between France and Germany. He defused tensions in the congress by crossing the floor and shaking hands with German pacifist Ludwig Quidde.[3]:167–8 This was his last recorded event, moments before his death.[3]:209 A year later, he attended the 15th Universal Peace Congress in Milan, alongside delegates from across Europe and the United States like Felix Moscheles and Bertha von Suttner.[17] Recognising the popularity of peace activism, secondnameplaceholder remarked in 1909 that "the influence of these international [peace congresses] increases ... from year to year; it becomes more and more evident that they are taken seriously in the highest quarters".[3]:87Despite secondnameplaceholder's fame, his economic doctrines failed to gather momentum among his countrymen.[13]
<h2>Illness and death</h2>
In May 1912, celebrations had been prepared for secondnameplaceholder's 90th birthday, but he was unable to attend due to his worsening health.[18]:213 He had intended to give an address at the celebrations, but it was later published in Le Paix par le Droit.[18]:213 Addressing his desire to "lessen the evil in the world and increase the good", it ended with the words:secondnameplaceholder spent his last months incapacitated in bed.[4]:54 On 12 June 1912, he died in Paris.[1]:975 His funeral was a simple one without "flowers or pomp", the service being led by his friend, the Protestant pastor Charles Wagner.[13][4]:42
<h2>Religious and political views</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born into a Catholic family, regularly attending Mass and making friends with Ézy-sur-Eure's priest while living there in the 1850s.[4]:41In 1870, Pope Pius IX's First Vatican Council issued the Pastor aeternus, which legitimised Papal infallibility and solidified his word as divine. secondnameplaceholder could not accept this assertion of authority, and his family switched to a non-denominational, liberal Protestantism instead. Despite his Catholic background, he was supported by members of different denominations like the Protestant pastor Joseph Martin-Paschoud and Grand Rabbi Lazare Isidor. secondnameplaceholder's son Paul suggested that he may have remained a "liberal Catholic" even after 1870, commenting on his close friendship with the radical Catholic priest Hyacinthe Loyson.[4]:40–1While acknowledging their attendance at peace congresses, secondnameplaceholder disagreed with the violence that often accompanied the labour movement, considering it to be a hindrance to peace-seeking efforts. However, he did agree that socialists had "some points, some very legitimate aspirations, that we would be wrong not to take into account".[4]:43In 1894, the Universal Peace Congress in Antwerp considered the ways in which members of the labour movement might be further involved with the peace movement, but secondnameplaceholder argued against such a co-operation. He denied any difference between social classes in a free and democratic society, and suggested that members of the labour movement join already-existing peace societies, instead of creating new society-aligned entities.[4]:43Despite serving in the National Guard, secondnameplaceholder disapproved of the idea of garrison life, believing that it led to laziness, gambling, and promiscuity.[4]:46 Instead, he suggested that the citizen-soldier would be a better idea:Instead of being removed from society, they would be allowed to develop the "military virtues" within it.[4]:46While sitting in the Chamber, secondnameplaceholder advocated for a three-year obligatory term of service for all French citizens, but suggested that those adding to "the intellectual grandeur of France" may be allowed a shorter term.[4]:49When asked by young peace activists to support disarmament, secondnameplaceholder responded that:He argued that it was impossible to disarm countries without first putting in place institutions that promoted international co-operation and arbitration.[4]:47Like his non-denominational religious views, secondnameplaceholder was seemingly apolitical. He sat as an independent conservative republican,[11] yet spoke often in support of libertarian policies like free trade economics.[13]In August 1898, Nicholas II of Russia published a rescript which called for an international conference to discuss a peace agenda. secondnameplaceholder saw this as proof that his neutral and apolitical brand of peacekeeping had worked, believing that leaders would see the negatives of an "infinite arms race" and work together across country lines.[3]:208
<h2>Marriage and issue</h2>
In 1847, secondnameplaceholder married the wealthy Marie Blanche Sageret (1827–1900), the daughter of  Jules Sageret and Marie Florence Irma Moricet.[5] Their first son, Paul, was born in 1859. He became a famous linguist, known for founding the International Phonetic Association.[19] secondnameplaceholder's progressive views on European culture were influential towards his parenting: his son Paul learnt four languages as a child, yet never attended school.[20]:21 Another son, Jean, was born in 1866: he also became a linguist and preceded his brother as Secretary of the IPA.[20]:21–2secondnameplaceholder and Sageret also had a daughter called Marie Louise, whose husband Louis André Paulian was in charge of the Chamber of Deputies's stenographic bureau.[5][21] On 17 February 1912, Mathilde Paulian, the 20-year-old daughter of Marie and Louis, climbed over the railings of the Eiffel Tower observation deck and fell to her death, apparently upset over the ill health of her grandfather (secondnameplaceholder) and sister.[22][4]:54–5Alix, another daughter of secondnameplaceholder and Sageret, married Charles Mortet, an officer in the Legion of Honour.[23]:558In 1856, secondnameplaceholder acquired the Désert de Retz estate in Chambourcy from Jean-François Bayard.[24] A relative called Pierre secondnameplaceholder lived there in 1923,[25] and the family owned the house until 1949.[24]
<h2>Legacy</h2>
secondnameplaceholder's brand of peace through arbitration and international co-operation continued long after his death, with activists lobbying for formalised treaties over "the rights of foreign visitors, joint access to waterways, settlement of territorial disputes".[3]:208 In his will, secondnameplaceholder expressed his independent and peaceful nature, writing:In 1927, his son Paul published a memoir of his father's life entitled Un apôtre de la paix: La vie de firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder.[4]:57Several roads have been named after secondnameplaceholder, such as those in Nice, Neuilly-sur-Seine, and Saint-Germain-en-Laye. In March 2004, the Inter-parliamentary Union acknowledged secondnameplaceholder's effort in its creation and inaugurated the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Archive Centre in Paris.[4]:55–6
(!!)Article(!/!)
Henry secondnameplaceholder (born Jean-firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder; 8 May 1828 – 30 October 1910), also known as firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, was a Swiss humanitarian, businessman and social activist. He was the visionary, promoter and co-founder and father of the Red Cross. In 1901 he received the first Nobel Peace Prize together with Frédéric Passy, making secondnameplaceholder the first Swiss Nobel laureate.During a business trip in 1859, secondnameplaceholder was witness to the aftermath of the Battle of Solferino in modern-day Italy. He recorded his memories and experiences in the book A Memory of Solferino which inspired the creation of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) in 1863. The 1864 Geneva Convention was based on secondnameplaceholder's idea for an independent organisation to care for wounded soldiers.secondnameplaceholder was the founder of the Swiss branch of the Young Men's Christian Association YMCA.[4]
<h2>Early life and education</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born in Geneva, Switzerland, in 1828 as the first son of businessman Jean-Jacques secondnameplaceholder and Antoinette secondnameplaceholder-Colladon. His family was devoutly Calvinist and had significant influence in Geneva society. His parents stressed the value of social work, and his father was active helping orphans and parolees, while his mother worked with the sick and poor.secondnameplaceholder grew up during the period of religious awakening known as the Réveil, and at age 18 he joined the Geneva Society for Alms giving. In the following year, together with friends, he founded the so-called "Thursday Association", a loose band of young men that met to study the Bible and help the poor, and he spent much of his free time engaged in prison visits and social work. On 30 November 1852, he founded the Geneva chapter of the YMCA and three years later he took part in the Paris meeting devoted to the founding of its international organization.In 1849, at age 21, secondnameplaceholder left the Collège de Genève due to poor grades, and he began an apprenticeship with the money-changing firm Lullin et Sautter. After its successful conclusion, he remained as an employee of the bank.
<h2>Algeria</h2>
In 1853, secondnameplaceholder visited Algeria, Tunisia, and Sicily, on assignment with a company devoted to the "colonies of Setif" (Compagnie genevoise des Colonies de Sétif). Despite little experience, he successfully fulfilled the assignment. Inspired by the trip, he wrote his first book with the title An Account of the Regency in Tunis (Notice sur la Régence de Tunis), published in 1858.In 1856, he created a business to operate in foreign colonies, and, after being granted a land concession by French-occupied Algeria, a corn-growing and trading company called the Financial and Industrial Company of Mons-Djémila Mills (Société financière et industrielle des Moulins des Mons-Djémila). However, the land and water rights were not clearly assigned, and the colonial authorities were not especially cooperative. As a result, secondnameplaceholder decided to appeal directly to French emperor Napoléon III, who was with his army in Lombardy at the time. France was fighting on the side of Piedmont-Sardinia against Austria, who had occupied much of today's Italy. Napoleon's headquarters were located in the small city of Solferino. secondnameplaceholder wrote a flattering book full of praise for Napoleon III with the intention to present it to the emperor, and then traveled to Solferino to meet with him personally.
<h2>Battle of Solferino</h2>
secondnameplaceholder arrived in Solferino on the evening of 24 June 1859, on the same day a battle between the two sides had occurred nearby. Twenty-three thousand wounded, dying and dead remained on the battlefield, and there appeared to be little attempt to provide care. Shocked, secondnameplaceholder himself took the initiative to organize the civilian population, especially the women and girls, to provide assistance to the injured and sick soldiers. They lacked sufficient materials and supplies, and secondnameplaceholder himself organized the purchase of needed materials and helped erect makeshift hospitals. He convinced the population to service the wounded without regard to their side in the conflict as per the slogan "Tutti fratelli" (All are brothers) coined by the women of nearby city Castiglione delle Stiviere. He also succeeded in gaining the release of Austrian doctors captured by the French.
<h2>Red Cross founding history</h2>
After returning to Geneva early in July, secondnameplaceholder decided to write a book about his experiences, which he titled Un Souvenir de Solferino (A Memory of Solferino). It was published in 1862 in an edition of 1,600 copies and was printed at secondnameplaceholder's own expense. In the book, he described the battle, its costs, and the chaotic circumstances afterwards. He also developed the idea that in the future a neutral organization should exist to provide care to wounded soldiers. He distributed the book to many leading political and military figures in Europe.secondnameplaceholder also began to travel through Europe to promote his ideas. His book was largely positively received, and the President of the Geneva Society for Public Welfare, jurist Gustave Moynier, made the book and its suggestions the topic of the 9 February 1863 meeting of the organization. secondnameplaceholder's recommendations were examined and positively assessed by the members. They created a five-person Committee to further pursue the possibility of their implementation and made secondnameplaceholder one of the members. The others were Moynier, the Swiss army general firstnameplaceholder Dufour, and doctors Louis Appia and Théodore Maunoir. Their first meeting on 17 February 1863 is now considered the founding date of the International Committee of the Red Cross.From early on, Moynier and secondnameplaceholder had increasing disagreements and conflicts regarding their respective visions and plans. Moynier considered secondnameplaceholder's idea to establish neutrality protections for care providers unfeasible and advised secondnameplaceholder not to insist upon this concept. However, secondnameplaceholder continued to advocate this position in his travels and conversations with high-ranking political and military figures. This intensified the personal conflict between Moynier, who took a rather pragmatic approach to the project, and secondnameplaceholder, who was the idealist among the five.In October 1863, 14 states took part in a meeting in Geneva organized by the committee to discuss the improvement of care for wounded soldiers. secondnameplaceholder was a protocol leader during the meeting. A year later on 22 August 1864, a diplomatic conference organized by the Swiss government led to the signing of the First Geneva Convention by 12 states. secondnameplaceholder was in charge of organizing accommodation for the attendees.
<h2>Forgotten period</h2>
secondnameplaceholder's businesses in Algeria had suffered. In April 1867, the bankruptcy of the financial firm Crédit Genevois led to a scandal involving secondnameplaceholder. He declared bankruptcy. The social outcry in Geneva, a city deeply rooted in Calvinist traditions, also led to calls for him to separate himself from the International Committee. Already on 25 August 1867, he resigned as Secretary and, on 8 September 1867, he was fully removed from the committee. secondnameplaceholder was condemned by the Geneva Trade Court on 17 August 1868 for deceptive practices in the bankruptcies. Due to their investments in the firm, his family and many of his friends were also heavily affected by the downfall of the company.In February 1868, secondnameplaceholder's mother died. Later that year he was expelled from the YMCA.[why?] In March 1867, he left his home city Geneva and would not return for the rest of his life. In the following years, Moynier likely used his influence to attempt to ensure that secondnameplaceholder would not receive assistance and support from his friends. For example, the gold medal prize of Sciences Morales at the Paris World's Fair did not go to secondnameplaceholder as originally planned but to Moynier, Dufour, and secondnameplaceholder together so that the prize money would only go to the committee as a whole. Napoléon III's offer to take over half of secondnameplaceholder's debts if secondnameplaceholder's friends would secure the other half was also thwarted by Moynier's efforts.secondnameplaceholder moved to Paris, where he lived in meager conditions. However, he continued to pursue his humanitarian ideas and plans. During the Franco-Prussian War (1870–1871), he founded the Common Relief Society (Allgemeine Fürsorgegesellschaft) and soon after the Common Alliance for Order and Civilization (Allgemeine Allianz für Ordnung und Zivilisation). He argued for disarmament negotiations and for the erection of an international court to mediate international conflicts. Later he worked for the creation of a world library, an idea which had echoes in future projects such as UNESCO.In his continued pursuit and advocacy of his ideas, he further neglected his personal situation and income, falling further in debt and being shunned by his acquaintances. Despite being appointed an honorary member of the national Red Cross societies of Austria, the Netherlands, Sweden, Prussia and Spain, he was nearly forgotten in the official discourse of the Red Cross Movement, even as it was rapidly expanding to new countries. He lived in poverty, moving to various places between 1874 and 1886, including Stuttgart, Rome, Corfu, Basel, and Karlsruhe. In Stuttgart he met the Tübingen University student Rudolf Müller with whom he would have a close friendship. In 1881, together with friends from Stuttgart, he went to the small Swiss resort village Heiden for the first time. In 1887 while living in London, he began to receive some monthly financial support from some distant family members. This enabled him to live a somewhat more secure existence, and he moved to Heiden in July. He spent the rest of his life there, and after 30 April 1892 he lived in a hospital and nursing home led by Dr. Hermann Altherr.In Heiden, he met the young teacher Wilhelm Sonderegger and his wife Susanna; they encouraged him to record his life experiences. Sonderegger's wife founded a branch of the Red Cross in Heiden and in 1890 secondnameplaceholder became its honorary president. With Sonderegger, secondnameplaceholder hoped to further promote his ideas, including publishing a new edition of his book. However, their friendship later was strained by secondnameplaceholder's unjustified accusations that Sonderegger, with Moynier in Geneva, was somehow conspiring against secondnameplaceholder. Sonderegger died in 1904 at age 42. Despite their strained relationship, secondnameplaceholder was deeply moved by the unexpected death. Wilhelm and Susanna Sonderegger's admiration for secondnameplaceholder, felt by both even after secondnameplaceholder's allegations, was passed on to their children. In 1935, their son René published a compilation of letters from secondnameplaceholder to his father.
<h2>Return to public memory</h2>
In September 1895, Georg Baumberger, the chief editor of the St. Gall newspaper Die Ostschweiz, wrote an article about the Red Cross founder, whom he had met and conversed with during a walk in Heiden a month earlier. The article entitled "firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, the founder of the Red Cross", appeared in the German Illustrated Magazine Über Land und Meer, and the article was soon reprinted in other publications throughout Europe. The article struck a chord, and he received renewed attention and support. He received the Swiss Binet-Fendt Prize and a note from Pope Leo XIII. Because of support from Russian tsarist widow Maria Feodorovna and other donations, his financial situation improved remarkably.In 1897, Rudolf Müller, who was now working as a teacher in Stuttgart, wrote a book about the origins of the Red Cross, altering the official history to stress secondnameplaceholder's role. The book also contained the text of A Memory of Solferino. secondnameplaceholder began an exchange of correspondence with Bertha von Suttner and wrote numerous articles and writings. He was especially active in writing about women's rights, and in 1897 facilitated the founding of a "Green Cross" women's organization whose only section was briefly active in Brussels.
<h2>Nobel Peace Prize</h2>
In 1901, secondnameplaceholder was awarded the first-ever Nobel Peace Prize for his role in founding the International Red Cross Movement and initiating the Geneva Convention. By public and private means, Müller, and later Norwegian military physician Hans Daae (who had received a copy of Müller's book), advocated secondnameplaceholder's case to the Nobel committee over the course of 4 years.[5][6] The award was jointly given to French pacifist Frédéric Passy, founder of the Peace League and active with secondnameplaceholder in the Alliance for Order and Civilization. The official congratulations which he received from the International Committee finally represented the rehabilitation of secondnameplaceholder's reputation:Moynier and the International Committee as a whole had also been nominated for the prize. Although secondnameplaceholder was supported by a broad spectrum in the selection process, he was still a controversial candidate. Some argued that the Red Cross and the Geneva Convention had made war more attractive and imaginable by eliminating some of its suffering. Therefore, Müller, in a letter to the committee, argued that the prize should be divided between secondnameplaceholder and Passy, who for some time in the debate had been the leading candidate to be the sole recipient of the prize. Müller also suggested that if a prize were to be warranted for secondnameplaceholder, it should be given immediately because of his advanced age and ill health.By dividing the prize between Passy, a pacifist, and secondnameplaceholder, a humanitarian, the Nobel Committee set a precedent for the conditions of the Nobel Peace Prize selection which would have significant consequences in later years. A section of Nobel's will had indicated that the prize should go to an individual who had worked to reduce or eliminate standing armies, or directly to promote peace conferences, which made Passy a natural choice for his peace work. On the other hand, the arguably distinct bestowal for humanitarian effort alone was seen by some as a wide interpretation of Nobel's will. However, another part of Nobel's testament marked the prize for the individual who had best enhanced the "brotherhood of people," which could be interpreted more generally as seeing humanitarian work like secondnameplaceholder's as connected to peacemaking as well. Many recipients of the Nobel Peace Prize in later years can be assigned to either of these two categories first roughly established by the Nobel committee's decision in 1901.Hans Daae succeeded in placing secondnameplaceholder's part of the prize money, 104,000 Swiss Francs, in a Norwegian Bank and preventing access by his creditors. secondnameplaceholder himself never spent any of the money during his lifetime, continuing to live simply and reserving it for bequests in his will to those who cared for him and charitable causes.[5]
<h2>Death and legacy</h2>
Among several other awards in the following years, in 1903 secondnameplaceholder was given an honorary doctorate by the medical faculty of the University of Heidelberg. He lived in the nursing home in Heiden until his death. In the final years of his life, he suffered from depression and paranoia about pursuit by his creditors and Moynier. There were even days when secondnameplaceholder insisted that the cook of the nursing home first taste his food before his eyes to protect him against possible poisoning. In his final years, he spurned and attacked Calvinism and organized religion generally. He was said to be agnostic.[7]According to his nurses, the final act of his life was to send a copy of Müller's book to the Italian queen with a personal dedication. He died on 30 October 1910, and his final words were "Where has humanity gone?"According to his wishes, he was buried without ceremony in the Sihlfeld Cemetery in Zurich. In his will, he donated funds to secure a "free bed" in the Heiden nursing home always to be available for a poor citizen of the region and deeded some money to friends and charitable organizations in Norway and Switzerland. The remaining funds went to his creditors partially relieving his debt; his inability to fully erase his debts was a major burden to him until his death.His birthday, 8 May, is celebrated as the World Red Cross and Red Crescent Day. The former nursing home in Heiden now houses the Henry secondnameplaceholder Museum. In Geneva and other places there are numerous streets, squares, and schools named after him. The Henry secondnameplaceholder Medal, awarded every two years by the standing commission of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement is its highest decoration.His life is represented, with some fictional elements, in the film D'homme à hommes (1948), starring Jean-Louis Barrault, and the period of his life when the Red Cross was founded in the international film coproduction Henry secondnameplaceholder: Red on the Cross (2006). In 2010 the Takarazuka Revue staged a musical based on his time in Solferino and the founding of the Red Cross entitled Dawn at Solferino, or Where has Humanity Gone?.
<h2>Birth and education</h2>
Gobat was born on 21 May 1843 at Tramelan, Switzerland. He was the son of a Protestant pastor and the nephew of Samuel Gobat, a missionary who became bishop of Jerusalem. He was educated at the  University of Basel, University of Heidelberg, University of Bern, and University of Paris. He received his doctorate in law, summa cum laude, from the University of Heidelberg in 1867.
<h2>Career in law and politics</h2>
After completing his Ph.D, Gobat began his practicing law in Bern and also lectured on French civil law at Bern University. He then opened an office in Delémont in the canton of Bern, which soon became the leading legal firm of the district.After practicing law for fifteen years, he became involved in politics and education. In 1882, he was appointed superintendent of public instruction for the canton of Bern, a position he held for thirty years. He was a progressive in educational philosophy and he made many important reforms in the education system. He reformed the system of primary training, obtained increased budgetary support to improve the teacher-pupil ratio, supported the study of living languages, and provided pupils with an alternative to the traditionally narrow classical education by establishing curricula in vocational & professional training.He won acclaim for his erudite République de Berne et la France pendant les guerres de religion, which was published in 1891 and also widespread recognition for A People's History of Switzerland, which was published in 1900.He also pursued a career in politics. He was elected to many important positions. He was elected to the Grand Council of Bern in 1882. From 1884 to 1890, he was a member of the Council of States of Switzerland and from 1890 until his death in 1914, he was a member of the National Council, the other chamber of the central Swiss legislative body. In both politics and education, he was a liberal reformer. In 1902, he sponsored several legislation which applied the principle of arbitration to commercial treaties. 
Gobat worked with the Inter-Parliamentary Union, which was founded by William Randal Cremer, the winner of the Nobel Peace Prize in 1903, in 1889. In 1892 he became the president of the union's fourth conference, which was held in Bern and which founded the Bureau Interparlementaire. He served as general secretary of the bureau, an information office dealing with peace movements, international conciliation, and communication among national parliamentary bodies. The third conference of the union, held in Rome in 1891, established the International Peace Bureau, of which Gobat was director when it was awarded the Nobel peace prize in 1910.
<h2>Later years</h2>
In 1902, Gobat jointly received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1902 with Élie Ducommun for their leadership of the Permanent International Peace Bureau.After the death of Élie Ducommun in 1906, Gobat took over the direction of the International Peace Bureau.Gobat died on 16 March 1914 in Bern, Switzerland. While attending meeting of the peace conference at Bern, he arose as if to speak but collapsed, dying about an hour later.
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (19 February 1833, Geneva – 7 December 1906, Bern) was a Swiss peace activist. He was a Nobel laureate, awarded the 1902 Nobel Peace Prize, which he shared with Charles Albert Gobat.Born in Geneva, he worked as a tutor, language teacher, journalist and a translator for the Swiss federal Chancellery (1869–1873).In 1867 he helped to found the Ligue de la paix et de la liberté (League of Peace and Freedom), though he continued working at other positions, including secretary for the Jura-Simplon Steel Company from 1873 to 1891. That year, he was appointed director of the newly formed Bureau international de la paix (International Peace Office), the first non-governmental international peace organization, based in Bern. He refused to accept a salary for the position, stating that he wished to serve in this capacity solely for reasons of idealism.His keen organizational skills ensured the group's success. He was awarded in the Nobel Peace Prize in 1902, and served as director of the organization until his death in 1906.
(!!)Article(!/!)
Sir William firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (18 March 1828 – 22 July 1908) usually known by his middle name "firstnameplaceholder", was an English Liberal Member of Parliament, a pacifist, and a leading advocate for international arbitration. He was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1903 for his work with the international arbitration movement.[1]
<h2>Early life</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born to a working-class family in the southern English town of Fareham. His father was a coachman, who abandoned the family soon after firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was born. His mother raised him along with his two sisters, ensuring he received an education at a local Methodist school. He augmented his knowledge by attending free lectures, was apprenticed as a builder, and became a skilled carpenter.[2]Moving to London 1852, secondnameplaceholder became active as a union organiser, swiftly becoming a recognized labour leader. secondnameplaceholder was elected as the Secretary of the International Workingmen's Association in 1865, but resigned two years later in 1867, when the organization decided to make women eligeable at their direction. Being strongly opposed to women's suffrage,[3] this might have contributed to make him feel the organization was becoming too radical . While heavily involved in campaigning for progressive causes, and respected by Marx, secondnameplaceholder did not agree with a worker led revolution.[4]
<h2>Role in the international arbitration movement</h2>
From as early as his first unsuccessful run for Parliament in 1868, secondnameplaceholder had advocated the expansion of international arbitration as peaceful alternative to war for the resolution of disputes.[4]He was elected as Liberal Member of Parliament (MP) for Haggerston in the Shoreditch district of Hackney from 1885 to 1895, and then from 1900 until his death from pneumonia in 1908.Using his platform as an MP, secondnameplaceholder cultivated allies on both continental Europe and across the Atlantic, including Frédéric Passy, William Jennings Bryan and Andrew Carnegie.  Using his network of contacts and his talent for organisation, secondnameplaceholder did much to create and expand institutions for international arbitration, which during his lifetime were successful in peacefully resolving numerous international disputes. This work includes co-founding the Inter-Parliamentary Union and the International Arbitration League; gaining acceptance for the 1897 Olney–Pauncefote Treaty between the United States and Britain that would have required arbitration of major disputes as the Essequibo territory (the treaty was rejected by the US Senate and never went into effect); and preparing the ground for the Hague peace conferences of 1899 and 1907.[4]In recognition of his work in the arbitration movement, secondnameplaceholder won the Nobel Peace Prize, the first to do so solo, in 1903.[5]  Of the £8,000 award he donated £7,000 as an endowment for the International Arbitration League.[6]He also was named a Chevalier of the French Légion d'honneur,[7] won the Norwegian Knighthood of Saint Olaf  and was knighted in 1907.firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Primary School, in Haggerston,[8] is named in his honour.
<h2>Death</h2>
secondnameplaceholder died on 22 July 1908, leaving an estate of £2,241 (£1,803 net).[6]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder Sophie Felicitas Freifrau[1] secondnameplaceholder (Baroness firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, pronounced [ˈbɛɐ̯ta fɔn ˈzʊtnɐ]; née Countess Kinsky von Wchinitz und Tettau;[2] 9 June 1843 – 21 June 1914) was an Austrian-Bohemian pacifist and novelist. In 1905, she became the second female Nobel laureate (after Marie Curie in 1903),[3] the first woman to be awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, and the first Austrian laureate.
<h2>Early life</h2>
Suttner was born on 9 June 1843 at Kinský Palace in the Obecní dvůr district of Prague.[4] Her parents were the Austrian Lieutenant general (German: Feldmarschall-Leutnant) Franz Michael de Paula Josef Graf Kinsky von Wchinitz und Tettau (1769-1843), recently deceased at the age of 75, and his wife Sophie Wilhelmine von Körner, who was fifty years his junior.[5][6] Her father was a member of the illustrious House of Kinsky via descent from Count Vilém Kinský. Suttner's mother came from a family that belonged to untitled nobility of significantly lower status, being the daughter of Joseph von Körner, a Captain of the Cavalry in the Imperial Army, distant relative of the poet Theodor Körner. Through her mother, firstnameplaceholder was also related to Theodor Körner, Edler von Siegringen, namesake and great-nephew of the poet, who later served as 4th President of Austria.[7] As well as film producer, writer and author Jason L. Koerner (born 1972). For the rest of her life, Suttner faced exclusion from the Austrian high nobility due to her mixed descent; for instance, only those with an unblemished aristocratic pedigree back to their great-great-grandparents were eligible to be presented at court. She was additionally disadvantaged because her father, as a third son, had no great estates or other financial resources to be inherited. Suttner was baptised at the Church of Our Lady of the Snows, not a traditional choice for the aristocracy.[5]Soon after her birth, Suttner's mother moved to live in Brno near firstnameplaceholder's guardian Landgrave Friedrich Michael zu Fürstenberg-Taikowitz (1793–1866). Her older brother Count Arthur Franz Kinsky (1827–1906) was sent to a military school, at the age of six, and subsequently had little contact with the family. In 1855, Suttner's maternal aunt Charlotte (Lotte) Büschel, née von Körner, who was also a widow and her daughter Elvira joined the household.[8] Elvira, an orphan whose father was a private scholar and whose official guardian, after the death of her father, became Count Johann Carl August von Huyn was of a similar age to Suttner and interested in intellectual pursuits, introducing Suttner to literature and philosophy.[9] Beyond her reading, Suttner gained proficiency in French, Italian and English as an adolescent, under the supervision of a succession of private tutors; she also became an accomplished amateur pianist and singer.[10]Suttner's mother and aunt considered themselves to be clairvoyant and thus went to gamble at Wiesbaden in the summer of 1856, hoping to return with a fortune. Their losses were so heavy that they were forced to move to Vienna. During this trip Suttner received a marriage proposal from Prince Philipp zu Sayn-Wittgenstein-Berleburg (1836–1858), third son of Minister of State of the Duchy of Nassau, Prince August Ludwig zu Sayn-Wittgenstein-Berleburg and Franziska Allesina genannt von Schweitzer (1802-1878), which was declined due to her young age.[11] The family returned to Wiesbaden in 1859; the second trip was similarly unsuccessful, and they had to relocate to a small property in Klosterneuburg. Shortly after this, Suttner wrote her first published work, the novella Erdenträume im Monde, which appeared in Die Deutsche Frau. Continuing poor financial circumstances led Suttner to a brief engagement to the wealthy Gustav, Baron Heine von Geldern, 31 years her senior and member of the banking Heine family, whom she came to find unattractive and rejected; her memoirs record her disgusted response to the older man's attempt to kiss her.[10]In 1864, the family spent the summer at Bad Homburg which was also a fashionable gambling destination among the aristocracy of the era. Suttner befriended the Georgian aristocrat Ekaterine Dadiani, Princess of Mingrelia, and met Tsar Alexander II.[12] Seeking a career as an opera singer as an alternative to marrying into money, Suttner undertook an intensive course of lessons, working on her voice for over four hours a day. Despite tuition from the eminent Gilbert Duprez in Paris in 1867, and from Pauline Viardot in Baden-Baden in 1868, she never secured a professional engagement. She suffered from stage fright and was unable to project well in performance.[13][14][15] In the summer of 1872 she was engaged to Prince Adolf zu Sayn-Wittgenstein-Hohenstein (1839–1872), son of Prince Alexander zu Sayn-Wittgenstein-Hohenstein (1801–1874) and Countess Amalie Luise von Bentheim-Tecklenburg-Rheda (1802–1887), who died at sea that October, while travelling to America to escape his debts.[16]
<h2>Tutor in the Suttner household, life in Georgia</h2>
Her cousin Elvira and firstnameplaceholder's guardian Landgrave Friedrich zu Fürstenberg had both died in 1866, and Suttner, now above the typical age of marriage, felt increasingly constrained by her mother's eccentricity and the family's poor financial circumstances.[17] In 1873, she found employment as a tutor and companion to the four daughters of Karl, Baron secondnameplaceholder, who were aged between 15 and 20. The Suttner family lived in the Innere Stadt of Vienna three seasons of the year, and spent the summer at Castle Harmannsdorf in Lower Austria. She had an affectionate relationship with her four young students, who nicknamed her "Boulotte" (fatty) due to her size, a name she would later adopt as a literary pseudonym in the form "B. Oulot".[18][19] She soon fell in love with the girls' elder brother, Baron Arthur Gundaccar secondnameplaceholder, who was seven years her junior. They were engaged but unable to marry due to his parents' disapproval. In 1876, with the encouragement of her employers, she answered a newspaper advertisement which led to her briefly becoming secretary and housekeeper to Alfred Nobel in Paris.[20] In the few weeks of her employment, she and Nobel developed a friendship, and Nobel may have made romantic overtures.[21] However, she remained committed to Arthur and returned shortly to Vienna to marry him in secrecy, in the church of St. Aegyd in Gumpendorf.[22]The newlywed couple eloped to Mingrelia in western Georgia, Russian Empire, near the Black Sea, where she hoped to make use of her connection to the former ruling House of Dadiani. On their arrival, they were entertained by Prince Niko. The couple settled in Kutaisi, where they found work teaching languages and music to the children of the local aristocracy. However, they experienced considerable hardship despite their social connections, living in a simple three-roomed wooden house.[19][23] Their situation worsened in 1877 on the outbreak of the Russo-Turkish War, although Arthur worked as a reporter on the conflict for the Neue Freie Presse.[24] Suttner also wrote frequently for the Austrian press in this period and worked on her early novels, including Es Löwos, a romanticised account of her life with Arthur. In the aftermath of the war, Arthur attempted to set up a timber business, but it was unsuccessful.[25]
<h2>Arthur and Bertha von Suttner</h2>
Arthur and firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder were largely socially isolated in Georgia; their poverty restricted their engagement with high society, and neither ever became fluent speakers of Mingrelian or Georgian. To support themselves, both began writing as a career. While Arthur's writing during this period is dominated by local themes, Suttner's was not similarly influenced by Georgian culture.[26]In August 1882, Ekaterine Dadiani died. Soon afterwards, the couple decided to move to Tbilisi. Here Arthur took whatever work he could, in accounting, construction and wallpaper design, while Suttner largely concentrated on her writing. She became a correspondent of Michael Georg Conrad, eventually contributing an article to the 1885 edition of his publication Die Gesellschaft. The piece, entitled "Truth and Lies", is a polemic in favour of the naturalism of Émile Zola.[27][28] Her first significant political work, Inventarium einer Seele ("Inventory of the Soul") was published in Leipzig in 1883. In this work, Suttner takes a pro-disarmament, progressive stance, arguing for the inevitability of world peace due to technological advancement; a possibility also considered by her friend Nobel due to the increasingly deterrent effect of more powerful weapons.In 1884, Suttner's mother died, leaving the couple with further debts.[29] Arthur had befriended a Georgian journalist in Tbilisi, M,[30] and the couple agreed to collaborate with him on a translation of the Georgian epic The Knight in the Panther Skin. Suttner was to improve M.'s literal translation of the Georgian to French, and Arthur to translate the French to German.[29] This method proved arduous, and they worked for few hours each day due to the distraction of the Mingrelian countryside around M.'s home. Arthur published several articles on the work in the Georgian press, and Mihály Zichy prepared some illustrations for the publication,[29] but M. failed to make the expected payment, and after the Bulgarian Crisis began in 1885 the couple felt increasingly unsafe in Georgian society, which was becoming more hostile to Austrians due to Russian influence. They finally reconciled with Arthur's family and in May 1885 could return to Austria, where the couple lived at Harmannsdorf Castle in Lower Austria.[31]firstnameplaceholder found refuge in her marriage with Arthur, of which she remarked that "the third field of my feelings and moods lay within our married happiness. In this was my peculiarly inalienable home, my refuge for all possible conditions of life, […] and so the leaves of my diary are full not only of political domestic records of all kinds, but also of memoranda of our gay little jokes, our confidential enjoyable walks, our uplifting reading, our hours of music together, and our evening games of chess. To us personally nothing could happen. We had each other – that was everything."[32]
<h2>Peace activism</h2>
After their return to Austria, Suttner continued her journalism and concentrated on peace and war issues, corresponding with the French philosopher Ernest Renan and influenced by the International Arbitration and Peace Association founded by Hodgson Pratt in 1880.In 1889, Suttner became a leading figure in the peace movement with the publication of her pacifist novel, Die Waffen nieder! (Lay Down Your Arms!), which made her one of the leading figures of the Austrian peace movement. The book was published in 37 editions and translated into 12 languages. She witnessed the foundation of the Inter-Parliamentary Union and called for the establishment of the Austrian Gesellschaft der Friedensfreunde pacifist organisation in an 1891 Neue Freie Presse editorial. Suttner became chairwoman and also founded the German Peace Society the next year. She became known internationally as the editor of the international pacifist journal Die Waffen nieder!, named after her book, from 1892 to 1899. In 1897, she presented Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria with a list of signatures urging the establishment of an International Court of Justice and took part in the First Hague Convention in 1899 with the help of Theodor Herzl, who paid for her trip as a correspondent of the Zionist newspaper, Die Welt.[33]Upon her husband's death in 1902, Suttner had to sell Harmannsdorf Castle and moved back to Vienna. In 1904 she addressed the International Congress of Women in Berlin and for seven months travelled around the United States, attending a universal peace congress in Boston and meeting President Theodore Roosevelt.Though her personal contact with Alfred Nobel had been brief, she corresponded with him until his death in 1896, and it is believed that she was a major influence on his decision to include a peace prize among those prizes provided in his will, which she was awarded in the fifth term on 10 December 1905. The presentation took place on 18 April 1906 in Kristiania.In 1907, Suttner attended the Second Hague Peace Conference, which however mainly pertained to the law of war. Around this time, she also crossed paths with Anna Bernhardine Eckstein, another German champion of world peace, who influenced the agenda of the Second Hague Peace Conference. A year later she attended the International Peace Congress in London, where she first  met Caroline Playne, an English anti-war activist who would later write the first biography of Suttner.[34]In the run-up to World War I, Suttner continued to campaign against international armament. In 1911 she became a member of the advisory council of the Carnegie Peace Foundation.[35] In the last months of her life, while suffering from cancer, she helped organise the next Peace Conference, intended to take place in September 1914. However, the conference never took place, as she died of cancer on 21 June 1914, and seven days later the heir to her nation's throne, Franz Ferdinand was killed, triggering World War I.Suttner's pacifism was influenced by the writings of Immanuel Kant, Henry Thomas Buckle, Herbert Spencer, Charles Darwin and Leo Tolstoy (Tolstoy praised Die Waffen nieder!)
[36] conceiving peace as a natural state impaired by the human aberrances of war and militarism. As a result, she argued that a right to peace could be demanded under international law and was necessary in the context of an evolutionary Darwinist conception of history. Suttner was a respected journalist, with one historian describing her as "a most perceptive and adept political commentator".[36]
<h2>Writing</h2>
As a career writer, Suttner often had to write novels and novellas that she did not believe in or really want to write, to support herself. However, even in those novels there are traces of her political ideals; often, the romantic heroes would fall in love upon realising they were both fighting for the same ideals, usually peace and tolerance.[according to whom?]To promote her writing career and ideals, she used her connections in aristocracy and friendships with wealthy individuals, such as Alfred Nobel, to gain access to international heads of state, and also to gain popularity for her writing. To increase the financial success of her writing, she used a male pseudonym early in her career. In addition, Suttner often worked as a journalist to publicise her message or promote her own books, events, and causes.As Tolstoy noted and others have since agreed, there is a strong similarity between Suttner and Harriet Beecher Stowe. Both Beecher Stowe and Suttner "were neither simply writers of popular entertainment nor authors of tendentious propaganda.... [They] used entertainment for idealistic purposes."[37] For Suttner, peace and acceptance of all individuals and all peoples was the greatest ideal and theme.Suttner also wrote about other issues and ideals. Two common issues in her work, apart from pacifism, are religion and gender.There are two main issues with religion that Suttner often wrote about. She had a disdain for the spectacle and pomp of some religious practices. In a scene in Lay Down Your Arms she highlighted the odd theatricality of some religious practices. In the scene, the emperor and empress are washing the feet of normal citizens to show they are as humble as Jesus, but they invite everyone to witness their show of humility and enter the hall in a dramatic fashion. The protagonist Martha remarks that it was "indeed a sham washing."[38]Another issue prominent in much of her writing is the idea that war is righteously for God, and leaders often use religion as a pretext for war. Suttner criticised this reasoning on the grounds that it placed the state as the important entity to God rather than the individual, thereby making dying in battle more glorious than other forms of death or surviving a war. Much of Lay Down Your Arms discusses this topic.This type of religious thinking also leads to segregation and fighting based on religious differences, which firstnameplaceholder and Arthur secondnameplaceholder refused to accept. As a devout Christian, Arthur founded the League Against Anti-Semitism in response to the pogroms in Eastern Europe and the growing antisemitism across Europe.[39] The Suttner family called for acceptance of all people and all faiths, with Suttner writing in her memoirs that "religion was neighbourly love, not neighbourly hatred. Any kind of hatred, against other nations or against other creeds, detracted from the humaneness of humanity."[32]Suttner is often considered a leader in the women's liberation movement.[40] In Lay Down Your Arms, the protagonist Martha often clashes with her father on this issue. Martha does not want her son to play with toy soldiers and be indoctrinated to the masculine ideas of war. Martha's father attempts to put Martha back in the female gendered box by suggesting that the son will not need to ask for approval from a woman, and also states that Martha should marry again because women her age should not be alone.[38]This was not simply because she insisted that women are equal to men, but that she was able to tease out how sexism affects both men and women. Like Martha being placed in a female structured gender box, the character of Tilling is also placed in the male stereotyped box and affected by that. The character even discusses it, saying, "we men have to repress the instinct of self-preservation. Soldiers have also to repress the compassion, the sympathy for the gigantic trouble which invades both friend and foe; for next to cowardice, what is most disgraceful to us is all sentimentality, all that is emotional."[38]
<h2>Legacy</h2>
Although Suttner was not financially successful during her lifetime, her work has remained influential for those involved in the peace movement.[citation needed]She has also been commemorated on several coins and stamps:
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder  secondnameplaceholder Jr. (/ˈroʊzəvɛlt/ ROH-zə-velt;[b] October 27, 1858 – January 6, 1919), often referred to as Teddy or his initials T. R., was an American statesman, conservationist, naturalist, historian, and writer, who served as the 26th president of the United States from 1901 to 1909. He previously served as the 33rd governor of New York from 1899 to 1900 and the 25th vice president of the United States from March to September 1901. secondnameplaceholder emerged as a leader of the Republican Party and became a driving force for anti-trust and Progressive policies.secondnameplaceholder was a sickly child with debilitating asthma but partly overcame his health problems by embracing a strenuous lifestyle. He integrated his exuberant personality, a vast range of interests and achievements into a "cowboy" persona defined by robust masculinity. He was home-schooled and began a lifelong naturalist avocation before attending Harvard. His book The Naval War of 1812 (1882) established his reputation as a learned historian and popular writer. Upon entering politics, he became the leader of the reform faction of Republicans in New York's state legislature. His wife and mother both died in rapid succession, and he began to frequent a cattle ranch in the Dakotas. He served as Assistant Secretary of the Navy under President William McKinley but resigned to lead the Rough Riders during the Spanish–American War. Returning a war hero, he was elected governor of New York in 1898.[2] After Vice President Garret Hobart died in 1899, the New York state party leadership convinced McKinley to accept secondnameplaceholder as his running mate in the 1900 election. secondnameplaceholder campaigned vigorously, and the McKinley–secondnameplaceholder ticket won a landslide victory based on a platform of peace, prosperity, and conservation.secondnameplaceholder took office as vice president in 1901 and assumed the presidency at age 42 after McKinley was assassinated the following September.[3] He remains the youngest person to become President of the United States. secondnameplaceholder was a leader of the progressive movement and championed his "Square Deal" domestic policies, promising the average citizen fairness, breaking of trusts, regulation of railroads, and pure food and drugs. He prioritized conservation and established national parks, forests, and monuments intended to preserve the nation's natural resources. In foreign policy, he focused on Central America where he began construction of the Panama Canal. He expanded the Navy and sent the Great White Fleet on a world tour to project American naval power. His successful efforts to broker the end of the Russo-Japanese War won him the 1906 Nobel Peace Prize. secondnameplaceholder was elected to a full term in 1904 and continued to promote progressive policies. He groomed his close friend William Howard Taft to succeed him in the 1908 presidential election.secondnameplaceholder grew frustrated with Taft's brand of conservatism and belatedly tried to win the 1912 Republican nomination for president. He failed, walked out, and founded the Progressive Party. He ran in the 1912 presidential election and the split allowed the Democratic nominee Woodrow Wilson to win the election. Following the defeat, secondnameplaceholder led a two-year expedition to the Amazon basin where he nearly died of tropical disease. During World War I, he criticized Wilson for keeping the country out of the war; his offer to lead volunteers to France was rejected. He considered running for president again in 1920, but his health continued to deteriorate. He died in 1919. He is generally ranked in polls of historians and political scientists as one of the five best presidents.[citation needed]firstnameplaceholder  secondnameplaceholder Jr. (/ˈroʊzəvɛlt/ ROH-zə-velt;[b] October 27, 1858 – January 6, 1919), often referred to as Teddy or his initials T. R., was an American statesman, conservationist, naturalist, historian, and writer, who served as the 26th president of the United States from 1901 to 1909. He previously served as the 33rd governor of New York from 1899 to 1900 and the 25th vice president of the United States from March to September 1901. secondnameplaceholder emerged as a leader of the Republican Party and became a driving force for anti-trust and Progressive policies.secondnameplaceholder was a sickly child with debilitating asthma but partly overcame his health problems by embracing a strenuous lifestyle. He integrated his exuberant personality, a vast range of interests and achievements into a "cowboy" persona defined by robust masculinity. He was home-schooled and began a lifelong naturalist avocation before attending Harvard. His book The Naval War of 1812 (1882) established his reputation as a learned historian and popular writer. Upon entering politics, he became the leader of the reform faction of Republicans in New York's state legislature. His wife and mother both died in rapid succession, and he began to frequent a cattle ranch in the Dakotas. He served as Assistant Secretary of the Navy under President William McKinley but resigned to lead the Rough Riders during the Spanish–American War. Returning a war hero, he was elected governor of New York in 1898.[2] After Vice President Garret Hobart died in 1899, the New York state party leadership convinced McKinley to accept secondnameplaceholder as his running mate in the 1900 election. secondnameplaceholder campaigned vigorously, and the McKinley–secondnameplaceholder ticket won a landslide victory based on a platform of peace, prosperity, and conservation.secondnameplaceholder took office as vice president in 1901 and assumed the presidency at age 42 after McKinley was assassinated the following September.[3] He remains the youngest person to become President of the United States. secondnameplaceholder was a leader of the progressive movement and championed his "Square Deal" domestic policies, promising the average citizen fairness, breaking of trusts, regulation of railroads, and pure food and drugs. He prioritized conservation and established national parks, forests, and monuments intended to preserve the nation's natural resources. In foreign policy, he focused on Central America where he began construction of the Panama Canal. He expanded the Navy and sent the Great White Fleet on a world tour to project American naval power. His successful efforts to broker the end of the Russo-Japanese War won him the 1906 Nobel Peace Prize. secondnameplaceholder was elected to a full term in 1904 and continued to promote progressive policies. He groomed his close friend William Howard Taft to succeed him in the 1908 presidential election.secondnameplaceholder grew frustrated with Taft's brand of conservatism and belatedly tried to win the 1912 Republican nomination for president. He failed, walked out, and founded the Progressive Party. He ran in the 1912 presidential election and the split allowed the Democratic nominee Woodrow Wilson to win the election. Following the defeat, secondnameplaceholder led a two-year expedition to the Amazon basin where he nearly died of tropical disease. During World War I, he criticized Wilson for keeping the country out of the war; his offer to lead volunteers to France was rejected. He considered running for president again in 1920, but his health continued to deteriorate. He died in 1919. He is generally ranked in polls of historians and political scientists as one of the five best presidents.[citation needed]
<h2>Early life and family</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Jr. was born on October 27, 1858, at 28 East 20th Street in Manhattan, New York City.[5] He was the second of four children born to socialite Martha Stewart "Mittie" Bulloch and businessman and philanthropist firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Sr. He had an older sister (Anna, nicknamed "Bamie"), a younger brother (Elliott) and a younger sister (Corinne).[6] Elliott was later the father of First Lady Anna Eleanor secondnameplaceholder, the wife of firstnameplaceholder's distant cousin, President Franklin Delano secondnameplaceholder. His paternal grandfather was of Dutch descent;[7] his other ancestry included primarily Scottish and Scots-Irish, English[8] and smaller amounts of German, Welsh and French.[9] firstnameplaceholder Sr. was the fifth son of businessman Cornelius Van Schaack "C.V.S." secondnameplaceholder and Margaret Barnhill as well as a brother of Robert secondnameplaceholder and James A. secondnameplaceholder. firstnameplaceholder's fourth cousin, James secondnameplaceholder I, who was also a businessman, was the father of President Franklin Delano secondnameplaceholder. Mittie was the younger daughter of Major James Stephens Bulloch and Martha P. "Patsy" Stewart.[10] Through the Van Schaacks, secondnameplaceholder was a descendant of the Schuyler family.[11]secondnameplaceholder's youth was largely shaped by his poor health and debilitating asthma. He repeatedly experienced sudden nighttime asthma attacks that caused the experience of being smothered to death, which terrified both firstnameplaceholder and his parents. Doctors had no cure.[12] Nevertheless, he was energetic and mischievously inquisitive.[13] His lifelong interest in zoology began at age seven when he saw a dead seal at a local market; after obtaining the seal's head, secondnameplaceholder and two cousins formed what they called the "secondnameplaceholder Museum of Natural History". Having learned the rudiments of taxidermy, he filled his makeshift museum with animals that he killed or caught; he then studied the animals and prepared them for exhibition. At age nine, he recorded his observation of insects in a paper entitled "The Natural History of Insects".[14]secondnameplaceholder's father significantly influenced him. His father was a prominent leader in New York's cultural affairs; he helped to found the Metropolitan Museum of Art, and had been especially active in mobilizing support for the Union during the Civil War, even though his in-laws included Confederate leaders. secondnameplaceholder said, "My father, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, was the best man I ever knew. He combined strength and courage with gentleness, tenderness, and great unselfishness. He would not tolerate in us children selfishness or cruelty, idleness, cowardice, or untruthfulness." Family trips abroad, including tours of Europe in 1869 and 1870, and Egypt in 1872, shaped his cosmopolitan perspective.[15] Hiking with his family in the Alps in 1869, secondnameplaceholder found that he could keep pace with his father. He had discovered the significant benefits of physical exertion to minimize his asthma and bolster his spirits.[16] secondnameplaceholder began a heavy regime of exercise. After being manhandled by two older boys on a camping trip, he found a boxing coach to teach him to fight and strengthen his body.[17][18]A 6-year-old secondnameplaceholder witnessed the funeral procession of Abraham Lincoln from his grandfather's mansion in Union Square, New York City where he was photographed in the window along with his brother Elliott, as confirmed by wife Edith who was also present.[19]secondnameplaceholder was homeschooled, mostly by tutors and his parents.[21] Biographer H. W. Brands argued that "The most obvious drawback to his home schooling was uneven coverage of the various areas of human knowledge."[22] He was solid in geography and bright in history, biology, French, and German; however, he struggled in mathematics and the classical languages.[citation needed] When he entered Harvard College on September 27, 1876, his father advised: "Take care of your morals first, your health next, and finally your studies."[23] His father's sudden death on February 9, 1878, devastated secondnameplaceholder, but he eventually recovered and doubled his activities.[24]He did well in science, philosophy, and rhetoric courses but continued to struggle in Latin and Greek. He studied biology intently and was already an accomplished naturalist and a published ornithologist. He read prodigiously with an almost photographic memory.[25] While at Harvard, secondnameplaceholder participated in rowing and boxing; he was once runner-up in a Harvard boxing tournament.[26] secondnameplaceholder was a member of the Alpha Delta Phi literary society (later the Fly Club), the Delta Kappa Epsilon fraternity, and the prestigious Porcellian Club; he was also an editor of The Harvard Advocate. In 1880, secondnameplaceholder graduated Phi Beta Kappa (22nd of 177) from Harvard with an A.B. magna cum laude. Biographer Henry Pringle states:After his father's death, secondnameplaceholder had inherited $65,000 (equivalent to $1,743,121 in 2020), enough to live off comfortably for the rest of his life.[28] secondnameplaceholder gave up his earlier plan of studying natural science and instead decided to attend Columbia Law School, moving back into his family's home in New York City. secondnameplaceholder was an able law student, but he often found law to be irrational. He spent much of his time writing a book on the War of 1812.[29]Determined to enter politics, secondnameplaceholder began attending meetings at Morton Hall, the 59th Street headquarters of New York's 21st District Republican Association. Though secondnameplaceholder's father had been a prominent member of the Republican Party, the younger secondnameplaceholder made an unorthodox career choice for someone of his class, as most of secondnameplaceholder's peers refrained from becoming too closely involved in politics. secondnameplaceholder found allies in the local Republican Party, and he defeated an incumbent Republican state assemblyman closely tied to the political machine of Senator Roscoe Conkling. After his election victory, secondnameplaceholder decided to drop out of law school, later saying, "I intended to be one of the governing class."[29]While at Harvard, secondnameplaceholder began a systematic study of the role played by the young United States Navy in the War of 1812.[30][31] Assisted by two uncles, he scrutinized original source materials and official U.S. Navy records, ultimately publishing The Naval War of 1812 in 1882. The book contained drawings of individual and combined ship maneuvers, charts depicting the differences in iron throw weights of cannon shot between rival forces, and analyses of the differences and similarities between British and American leadership down to the ship-to-ship level. Upon release, The Naval War of 1812 was praised for its scholarship and style, and it remains a standard study of the war.[32]With the publication of The Influence of Sea Power upon History, 1660–1783 in 1890, Navy Captain Alfred Thayer Mahan was immediately hailed as the world's outstanding naval theorist by the leaders of Europe. secondnameplaceholder paid very close attention to Mahan's emphasis that only a nation with the world's most powerful fleet could dominate the world's oceans, exert its diplomacy to the fullest, and defend its own borders.[33][34] He incorporated Mahan's ideas into his views on naval strategy for the remainder of his career.[35][36]In 1880, secondnameplaceholder married socialite Alice Hathaway Lee.[37][38] Their daughter, Alice Lee secondnameplaceholder, was born on February 12, 1884. Two days later, the new mother died of an undiagnosed case of kidney failure that had been masked by the pregnancy. In his diary, secondnameplaceholder wrote a large 'X' on the page and then, "The light has gone out of my life." His mother, Mittie, had died of typhoid fever eleven hours earlier at 3:00 a.m., in the same house on 57th Street in Manhattan. Distraught, secondnameplaceholder left baby Alice in the care of his sister Bamie in New York City while he grieved; he assumed custody of her when she was three.[39][page needed]After the deaths of his wife and mother, secondnameplaceholder focused on his work, specifically by re-energizing a legislative investigation into corruption of the New York City government, which arose from a concurrent bill proposing that power be centralized in the mayor's office.[40] For the rest of his life, he rarely spoke about his wife Alice and did not write about her in his autobiography. While working with Joseph Bucklin Bishop on a biography that included a collection of his letters, secondnameplaceholder did not mention his marriage to Alice nor his second marriage to Edith Kermit Carow.[41]
<h2>Early political career</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was a member of the New York State Assembly (New York Co., 21st D.) in 1882, 1883 and 1884.[42] He immediately began making his mark, specifically in corporate corruption issues.[42] He blocked a corrupt effort by financier Jay Gould to lower his taxes. secondnameplaceholder exposed suspected collusion in the matter by Judge firstnameplaceholder Westbrook, and argued for and received approval for an investigation to proceed, aiming for the impeachment of the judge. The investigation committee rejected impeachment, but secondnameplaceholder had exposed the potential corruption in Albany, and thus assumed a high and positive political profile in multiple New York publications.[43]secondnameplaceholder's anti-corruption efforts helped him win re-election in 1882 by a margin greater than two-to-one, an achievement made even more impressive by the fact that Democratic gubernatorial candidate Grover Cleveland won secondnameplaceholder's district.[44] With Conkling's Stalwart faction of the Republican Party in disarray following the assassination of President James Garfield, secondnameplaceholder won election as the Republican party leader in the state assembly. He allied with Governor Cleveland to win passage of a civil service reform bill.[45] secondnameplaceholder won re-election a second time, and sought the office of Speaker of the New York State Assembly, but was defeated by Titus Sheard in a 41 to 29 vote of the GOP caucus.[46][47] In his final term, secondnameplaceholder served as Chairman of the Committee on Affairs of Cities; he wrote more bills than any other legislator.[48]With numerous presidential hopefuls to choose from, secondnameplaceholder supported Senator George F. Edmunds of Vermont, a colorless reformer. The state GOP preferred the incumbent president, New York City's Chester Arthur, who was known for passing the Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act. Arthur, at the time, was suffering from Bright's disease, unknown to the public, and out of duty he did not contest his own nomination. secondnameplaceholder fought hard and succeeded in influencing the Manhattan delegates at the state convention in Utica. He then took control of the state convention, bargaining through the night and outmaneuvering the supporters of Arthur and James G. Blaine; he gained a national reputation as a key person in New York State.[49]secondnameplaceholder attended the 1884 GOP National Convention in Chicago and gave a speech convincing delegates to nominate African American John R. Lynch, an Edmunds supporter, to be temporary chair. secondnameplaceholder fought alongside the Mugwump reformers; however, Blaine, having gained support from Arthur's and Edmunds's delegates, won the nomination by 541 votes on the fourth ballot. In a crucial moment of his budding political career, secondnameplaceholder resisted the demand of the Mugwumps that he bolt from Blaine. He bragged about his one small success: "We achieved a victory in getting up a combination to beat the Blaine nominee for temporary chairman... To do this needed a mixture of skill, boldness and energy... to get the different factions to come in... to defeat the common foe."[50] He was also impressed by an invitation to speak before an audience of ten thousand, the largest crowd he had addressed up to that date. Having gotten a taste of national politics, secondnameplaceholder felt less aspiration for advocacy on the state level; he then retired to his new "Chimney Butte Ranch" on the Little Missouri River.[51] secondnameplaceholder refused to join other Mugwumps in supporting Grover Cleveland, the governor of New York and the Democratic nominee in the general election. He debated the pros and cons of staying loyal with his political friend, Henry Cabot Lodge. After Blaine won the nomination, secondnameplaceholder had carelessly said that he would give "hearty support to any decent Democrat". He distanced himself from the promise, saying that it had not been meant "for publication".[52] When a reporter asked if he would support Blaine, secondnameplaceholder replied, "That question I decline to answer. It is a subject I do not care to talk about."[53] In the end, he realized that he had to support Blaine to maintain his role in the GOP, and he did so in a press release on July 19.[54] Having lost the support of many reformers, secondnameplaceholder decided to retire from politics and move to North Dakota.[55]
<h2>Cowboy in Dakota</h2>
secondnameplaceholder first visited the Dakota Territory in 1883 to hunt bison.[56] Exhilarated by the cowboy life, and with the cattle business booming in the territory, secondnameplaceholder invested $14,000 in hopes of becoming a prosperous cattle rancher. For the next several years, he shuttled between his home in New York and his ranch in Dakota.[57]Following the 1884 presidential election, secondnameplaceholder built a ranch named Elkhorn, which was 35 mi (56 km) north of the boomtown of Medora, North Dakota. secondnameplaceholder learned to ride western style, rope, and hunt on the banks of the Little Missouri. Though he earned the respect of the authentic cowboys, they were not overly impressed.[58] However, he identified with the herdsman of history, a man he said possesses "few of the emasculated, milk-and-water moralities admired by the pseudo-philanthropists; but he does possess, to a very high degree, the stern, manly qualities that are invaluable to a nation".[59][60] He reoriented, and began writing about frontier life for national magazines; he also published three books – Hunting Trips of a Ranchman, Ranch Life and the Hunting-Trail, and The Wilderness Hunter.[61]secondnameplaceholder brought his desire to address the common interests of citizens to the West. He successfully led efforts to organize ranchers to address problems of overgrazing and other shared concerns; his work resulted in the formation of the Little Missouri Stockmen's Association. He felt compelled to promote conservation and was able to form the Boone and Crockett Club, whose primary goal was the conservation of large game animals and their habitats.[62] After the uniquely severe US winter of 1886–87 wiped out his herd of cattle and those of his competitors, and with it over half of his $80,000 investment, secondnameplaceholder returned to the East.[63][64] Though his finances suffered from the experience, secondnameplaceholder's time in the West made it impossible to peg him as an ineffectual intellectual, a characterization that could have hampered his political career.[65]
<h2>Second marriage</h2>
On December 2, 1886, secondnameplaceholder married his childhood and family friend, Edith Kermit Carow.[66] secondnameplaceholder was deeply troubled that his second marriage had taken place so soon after the death of his first wife, and he faced resistance from his sisters.[67] Nonetheless, the couple married at St George's, Hanover Square in London, England.[68] The couple had five children: firstnameplaceholder "Ted" III in 1887, Kermit in 1889, Ethel in 1891, Archibald in 1894, and Quentin in 1897. The couple also raised secondnameplaceholder's daughter from his first marriage, Alice, who often clashed with her stepmother.[69]
<h2>Reentering public life</h2>
Upon secondnameplaceholder's return to New York in 1886, Republican leaders quickly approached him about running for mayor of New York City in the city's mayoral election. secondnameplaceholder accepted the nomination despite having little hope of winning the race against United Labor Party candidate Henry George and Democratic candidate Abram Hewitt.[70] secondnameplaceholder campaigned hard for the position, but Hewitt won with 41% (90,552 votes), taking the votes of many Republicans who feared George's radical policies.[71][70] George was held to 31% (68,110 votes), and secondnameplaceholder took third place with 27% (60,435 votes).[71] Fearing that his political career might never recover, secondnameplaceholder turned his attention to writing The Winning of the West, a historical work tracking the westward movement of Americans; the book was a great success for secondnameplaceholder, earning favorable reviews and selling numerous copies.[72]After Benjamin Harrison unexpectedly defeated Blaine for the presidential nomination at the 1888 Republican National Convention, secondnameplaceholder gave stump speeches in the Midwest in support of Harrison.[73] On the insistence of Henry Cabot Lodge, President Harrison appointed secondnameplaceholder to the United States Civil Service Commission, where he served until 1895.[74] While many of his predecessors had approached the office as a sinecure,[75] secondnameplaceholder vigorously fought the spoilsmen and demanded enforcement of civil service laws.[76] The New York Sun then described secondnameplaceholder as "irrepressible, belligerent, and enthusiastic".[77] secondnameplaceholder frequently clashed with Postmaster General John Wanamaker, who handed out numerous patronage positions to Harrison supporters, and secondnameplaceholder's attempt to force out several postal workers damaged Harrison politically.[78] Despite secondnameplaceholder's support for Harrison's reelection bid in the presidential election of 1892, the eventual winner, Grover Cleveland, reappointed him to the same post.[79] secondnameplaceholder's close friend and biographer, Joseph Bucklin Bishop, described his assault on the spoils system:In 1894, a group of reform Republicans approached secondnameplaceholder about running for Mayor of New York again; he declined, mostly due to his wife's resistance to being removed from the Washington social set. Soon after he declined, he realized that he had missed an opportunity to reinvigorate a dormant political career. He retreated to the Dakotas for a time; his wife Edith regretted her role in the decision and vowed that there would be no repeat of it.[80]William Lafayette Strong, a reform-minded Republican, won the 1894 mayoral election and offered secondnameplaceholder a position on the board of the New York City Police Commissioners.[73][81] secondnameplaceholder became president of the board of commissioners and radically reformed the police force. secondnameplaceholder implemented regular inspections of firearms and annual physical exams, appointed recruits based on their physical and mental qualifications rather than political affiliation, established Meritorious Service Medals, and closed corrupt police hostelries. During his tenure, a Municipal Lodging House was established by the Board of Charities, and secondnameplaceholder required officers to register with the Board; he also had telephones installed in station houses.[82]In 1894, secondnameplaceholder met Jacob Riis, the muckraking Evening Sun newspaper journalist who was opening the eyes of New Yorkers to the terrible conditions of the city's millions of poor immigrants with such books as How the Other Half Lives. Riis described how his book affected secondnameplaceholder:secondnameplaceholder made a habit of walking officers' beats late at night and early in the morning to make sure that they were on duty.[84] He made a concerted effort to uniformly enforce New York's Sunday closing law; in this, he ran up against boss Tom Platt as well as Tammany Hall—he was notified that the Police Commission was being legislated out of existence. His crackdowns led to protests and demonstrations. Invited to one large demonstration, not only did he surprisingly accept, he delighted in the insults, caricatures and lampoons directed at him, and earned some surprising good will.[85] secondnameplaceholder chose to defer rather than split with his party.[86] As Governor of New York State, he would later sign an act replacing the Police Commission with a single Police Commissioner.[87]
<h2>Emergence as a national figure</h2>
In the 1896 presidential election, secondnameplaceholder backed Speaker of the House Thomas Brackett Reed for the Republican nomination, but William McKinley won the nomination and defeated William Jennings Bryan in the general election.[88] secondnameplaceholder opposed Bryan's free silver platform, viewing many of Bryan's followers as dangerous fanatics, and secondnameplaceholder gave campaign speeches for McKinley.[89] Urged by Congressman Henry Cabot Lodge, President McKinley appointed secondnameplaceholder as the Assistant Secretary of the Navy in 1897.[90] Secretary of the Navy John D. Long was more concerned about formalities than functions, was in poor health, and left many major decisions to secondnameplaceholder. Influenced by Alfred Thayer Mahan, secondnameplaceholder called for a build-up in the country's naval strength, particularly the construction of battleships.[91] secondnameplaceholder also began pressing his national security views regarding the Pacific and the Caribbean on McKinley, and was particularly adamant that Spain be ejected from Cuba.[92] He explained his priorities to one of the Navy's planners in late 1897:On February 15, 1898, USS Maine, an armored cruiser, exploded in the harbor of Havana, Cuba, killing hundreds of crew members. While secondnameplaceholder and many other Americans blamed Spain for the explosion, McKinley sought a diplomatic solution.[94] Without approval from Long or McKinley, secondnameplaceholder sent out orders to several naval vessels, directing them to prepare for war.[94][95] George Dewey, who had received an appointment to lead the Asiatic Squadron with the backing of secondnameplaceholder, later credited his victory at the Battle of Manila Bay to secondnameplaceholder's orders.[96] After finally giving up hope of a peaceful solution, McKinley asked Congress to declare war upon Spain, beginning the Spanish–American War.[97]With the beginning of the Spanish–American War in late April 1898, secondnameplaceholder resigned from his post as Assistant Secretary of the Navy. Along with Army Colonel Leonard Wood, he formed the First US Volunteer Cavalry Regiment.[98] His wife and many of his friends begged secondnameplaceholder to remain in his post in Washington, but secondnameplaceholder was determined to see battle. When the newspapers reported the formation of the new regiment, secondnameplaceholder and Wood were flooded with applications from all over the country.[99] Referred to by the press as the "Rough Riders", the regiment was one of many temporary units active only for the duration of the war.[100]The regiment trained for several weeks in San Antonio, Texas, and in his autobiography, secondnameplaceholder wrote that his prior experience with the New York National Guard had been invaluable, in that it enabled him to immediately begin teaching his men basic soldiering skills.[101] The Rough Riders used some standard issue gear and some of their own design, purchased with gift money. Diversity characterized the regiment, which included Ivy Leaguers, professional and amateur athletes, upscale gentlemen, cowboys, frontiersmen, Native Americans, hunters, miners, prospectors, former soldiers, tradesmen, and sheriffs. The Rough Riders were part of the cavalry division commanded by former Confederate general Joseph Wheeler, which itself was one of three divisions in the V Corps under Lieutenant General William Rufus Shafter. secondnameplaceholder and his men landed in Daiquirí, Cuba, on June 23, 1898, and marched to Siboney. Wheeler sent parts of the 1st and 10th Regular Cavalry on the lower road northwest and sent the "Rough Riders" on the parallel road running along a ridge up from the beach. To throw off his infantry rival, Wheeler left one regiment of his Cavalry Division, the 9th, at Siboney so that he could claim that his move north was only a limited reconnaissance if things went wrong. secondnameplaceholder was promoted to colonel and took command of the regiment when Wood was put in command of the brigade. The Rough Riders had a short, minor skirmish known as the Battle of Las Guasimas; they fought their way through Spanish resistance and, together with the Regulars, forced the Spaniards to abandon their positions.[102]Under his leadership, the Rough Riders became famous for the charge up Kettle Hill on July 1, 1898, while supporting the regulars. secondnameplaceholder had the only horse, and rode back and forth between rifle pits at the forefront of the advance up Kettle Hill, an advance that he urged despite the absence of any orders from superiors. He was forced to walk up the last part of Kettle Hill because his horse had been entangled in barbed wire. The victories came at a cost of 200 killed and 1,000 wounded.[103]In August, secondnameplaceholder and other officers demanded that the soldiers be returned home. secondnameplaceholder always recalled the Battle of Kettle Hill (part of the San Juan Heights) as "the great day of my life" and "my crowded hour". In 2001, secondnameplaceholder was posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor for his actions;[104] he had been nominated during the war, but Army officials, annoyed at his grabbing the headlines, blocked it.[105] After returning to civilian life, secondnameplaceholder preferred to be known as "Colonel secondnameplaceholder" or "The Colonel", though "Teddy" remained much more popular with the public, even though secondnameplaceholder openly despised that moniker. Men working closely with secondnameplaceholder customarily called him "Colonel" or "firstnameplaceholder".[106] Henceforth, political cartoons of secondnameplaceholder usually depicted him in his Rough Rider garb.[citation needed]After leaving Cuba in August 1898, the Rough Riders were transported to a camp at Montauk Point, Long Island, where secondnameplaceholder and his men were briefly quarantined due to the War Department's fear of spreading yellow fever.[107] Shortly after secondnameplaceholder's return to the United States, Republican Congressman Lemuel E. Quigg, a lieutenant of party boss Tom Platt, asked secondnameplaceholder to run in the 1898 gubernatorial election. Platt disliked secondnameplaceholder personally, feared that secondnameplaceholder would oppose Platt's interests in office, and was reluctant to propel secondnameplaceholder to the forefront of national politics. However, Platt also needed a strong candidate due to the unpopularity of the incumbent Republican governor, Frank S. Black, and secondnameplaceholder agreed to become the nominee and to try not to "make war" with the Republican establishment once in office.[108] secondnameplaceholder defeated Black in the Republican caucus by a vote of 753 to 218, and faced Democrat Augustus Van Wyck, a well-respected judge, in the general election.[109] secondnameplaceholder campaigned vigorously on his war record, winning the election by a margin of just one percent.[110]As governor, secondnameplaceholder learned much about ongoing economic issues and political techniques that later proved valuable in his presidency. He was exposed to the problems of trusts, monopolies, labor relations, and conservation. Chessman argues that secondnameplaceholder's program "rested firmly upon the concept of the square deal by a neutral state". The rules for the Square Deal were "honesty in public affairs, an equitable sharing of privilege and responsibility, and subordination of party and local concerns to the interests of the state at large".[111]By holding twice-daily press conferences—which was an innovation—secondnameplaceholder remained connected with his middle-class political base.[112] secondnameplaceholder successfully pushed the Ford Franchise-Tax bill, which taxed public franchises granted by the state and controlled by corporations, declaring that "a corporation which derives its powers from the State, should pay to the State a just percentage of its earnings as a return for the privileges it enjoys".[113] He rejected "boss" Thomas C. Platt's worries that this approached Bryanite Socialism, explaining that without it, New York voters might get angry and adopt public ownership of streetcar lines and other franchises.[114]The New York state government affected many interests, and the power to make appointments to policy-making positions was a key role for the governor. Platt insisted that he be consulted on major appointments; secondnameplaceholder appeared to comply, but then made his own decisions. Historians marvel that secondnameplaceholder managed to appoint so many first-rate men with Platt's approval. He even enlisted Platt's help in securing reform, such as in the spring of 1899, when Platt pressured state senators to vote for a civil service bill that the secretary of the Civil Service Reform Association called "superior to any civil service statute heretofore secured in America".[115]Chessman argues that as governor, secondnameplaceholder developed the principles that shaped his presidency, especially insistence upon the public responsibility of large corporations, publicity as a first remedy for trusts, regulation of railroad rates, mediation of the conflict of capital and labor, conservation of natural resources and protection of the less fortunate members of society.[111] secondnameplaceholder sought to position himself against the excesses of large corporations on the one hand and radical movements on the other.[116]As the chief executive of the most populous state in the union, secondnameplaceholder was widely considered a potential future presidential candidate, and supporters such as William Allen White encouraged him to run for president.[117] secondnameplaceholder had no interest in challenging McKinley for the Republican nomination in 1900, and was denied his preferred post of Secretary of War. As his term progressed, secondnameplaceholder pondered a 1904 presidential run, but was uncertain about whether he should seek re-election as governor in 1900.[118]In November 1899, Vice President Garret Hobart died of heart failure, leaving an open spot on the 1900 Republican national ticket. Though Henry Cabot Lodge and others urged him to run for vice president in 1900, secondnameplaceholder was reluctant to take the powerless position and issued a public statement saying that he would not accept the nomination.[119] Additionally, secondnameplaceholder was informed by President McKinley and campaign manager Mark Hanna that he was not being considered for the role of vice president due to his actions prior to the Spanish–American War. Eager to be rid of secondnameplaceholder, Platt nonetheless began a newspaper campaign in favor of secondnameplaceholder's nomination for the vice presidency.[120] secondnameplaceholder attended the 1900 Republican National Convention as a state delegate and struck a bargain with Platt: secondnameplaceholder would accept the nomination for vice president if the convention offered it to him, but would otherwise serve another term as governor. Platt asked Pennsylvania party boss Matthew Quay to lead the campaign for secondnameplaceholder's nomination, and Quay outmaneuvered Hanna at the convention to put secondnameplaceholder on the ticket.[121] secondnameplaceholder won the nomination unanimously.[122]secondnameplaceholder's vice-presidential campaigning proved highly energetic and an equal match for Democratic presidential nominee William Jennings Bryan's famous barnstorming style of campaigning. In a whirlwind campaign that displayed his energy to the public, secondnameplaceholder made 480 stops in 23 states. He denounced the radicalism of Bryan, contrasting it with the heroism of the soldiers and sailors who fought and won the war against Spain. Bryan had strongly supported the war itself, but he denounced the annexation of the Philippines as imperialism, which would spoil America's innocence. secondnameplaceholder countered that it was best for the Filipinos to have stability and the Americans to have a proud place in the world. With the nation basking in peace and prosperity, the voters gave McKinley an even larger victory than that which he had achieved in 1896.[123][124]After the campaign, secondnameplaceholder took office as vice president in March 1901. The office of vice president was a powerless sinecure and did not suit secondnameplaceholder's aggressive temperament.[125] secondnameplaceholder's six months as vice president were uneventful, and secondnameplaceholder presided over the Senate for a mere four days before it adjourned.[126] On September 2, 1901, secondnameplaceholder first publicized an aphorism that thrilled his supporters at the Minnesota State Fair: "Speak softly and carry a big stick, and you will go far."[127]
<h2>Presidency (1901–1909)</h2>
On September 6, 1901, President McKinley was attending the Pan-American Exposition in Buffalo, New York when he was shot by Leon Czolgosz. secondnameplaceholder was vacationing in Vermont, and traveled to Buffalo to visit McKinley in the hospital. It appeared that McKinley would recover, so secondnameplaceholder resumed his vacation in the Adirondacks. When McKinley's condition worsened, secondnameplaceholder again traveled to Buffalo. McKinley died on September 14, and secondnameplaceholder was informed while he was in North Creek; he continued on to Buffalo and was sworn in as the nation's 26th president at the Ansley Wilcox House.[39][page needed]secondnameplaceholder's accession to the presidency left the vice presidency vacant. As there was no constitutional provision for filling an intra-term vacancy in that office (prior to ratification of the 25th Amendment in 1967), secondnameplaceholder served his first term without a vice president. McKinley's supporters were nervous about the new president, and Hanna was particularly bitter that the man he had opposed so vigorously at the convention had succeeded McKinley. secondnameplaceholder assured party leaders that he intended to adhere to McKinley's policies, and he retained McKinley's Cabinet. Nonetheless, secondnameplaceholder sought to position himself as the party's undisputed leader, seeking to bolster the role of the president and position himself for the 1904 election.[128]Shortly after taking office, secondnameplaceholder invited Booker T. Washington to dinner at the White House. To his dismay, this sparked a bitter, and at times vicious, reaction across the heavily segregated South. secondnameplaceholder reacted with astonishment and protest, saying that he looked forward to many future dinners with Washington. Upon further reflection, secondnameplaceholder wanted to ensure that this had no effect on political support in the South, and further dinner invitations to Washington were avoided;[129] their next meeting was scheduled as typical business at 10:00 a.m. instead.[130]For his aggressive use of the 1890 Sherman Antitrust Act, compared to his predecessors, secondnameplaceholder became mythologized as the "trust-buster"; but in reality he was more of a trust regulator.[131] secondnameplaceholder viewed big business as a necessary part of the American economy, and sought only to prosecute the "bad trusts" that restrained trade and charged unfair prices.[132] He brought 44 antitrust suits, breaking up the Northern Securities Company, the largest railroad monopoly; and regulating Standard Oil, the largest oil and refinery company.[133][131] Presidents Benjamin Harrison, Grover Cleveland, and William McKinley combined prosecuted only 18 antitrust violations under the Sherman Antitrust Act.[131]Bolstered by his party's winning large (but slightly smaller) majorities in the 1902 elections, secondnameplaceholder proposed the creation of the United States Department of Commerce and Labor, which would include the Bureau of Corporations. While Congress was receptive to the Department of Commerce and Labor, it was more skeptical of the antitrust powers that secondnameplaceholder sought to endow within the Bureau of Corporations. secondnameplaceholder successfully appealed to the public to pressure Congress, and Congress overwhelmingly voted to pass secondnameplaceholder's version of the bill.[134]In a moment of frustration, House Speaker Joseph Gurney Cannon commented on secondnameplaceholder's desire for executive branch control in domestic policy-making: "That fellow at the other end of the avenue wants everything from the birth of Christ to the death of the devil." Biographer Brands states, "Even his friends occasionally wondered whether there wasn't any custom or practice too minor for him to try to regulate, update or otherwise improve."[135] In fact, secondnameplaceholder's willingness to exercise his power included attempted rule changes in the game of football; at the Naval Academy, he sought to force retention of martial arts classes and to revise disciplinary rules. He even ordered changes made in the minting of a coin whose design he disliked, and ordered the Government Printing Office to adopt simplified spellings for a core list of 300 words, according to reformers on the Simplified Spelling Board. He was forced to rescind the latter after substantial ridicule from the press and a resolution of protest from the House of Representatives.[136]In May 1902, anthracite coal miners went on strike, threatening a national energy shortage. After threatening the coal operators with intervention by federal troops, secondnameplaceholder won their agreement to dispute arbitration by a commission, which succeeded in stopping the strike. The accord with J. P. Morgan resulted in the miners getting more pay for fewer hours, but with no union recognition.[137][138] secondnameplaceholder said, "My action on labor should always be considered in connection with my action as regards capital, and both are reducible to my favorite formula—a square deal for every man."[139] secondnameplaceholder was the first president to help settle a labor dispute.[140]During secondnameplaceholder's second year in office it was discovered there was corruption in the Indian Service, the Land Office, and the Post Office Department. secondnameplaceholder investigated and prosecuted corrupt Indian agents who had cheated the Creeks and various tribes out of land parcels. Land fraud and speculation were found involving Oregon federal timberlands. In November 1902, secondnameplaceholder and Secretary Ethan A. Hitchcock forced Binger Hermann, the General Land Office Commissioner, to resign from office. On November 6, 1903 Francis J. Heney was appointed special prosecutor and obtained 146 indictments involving an Oregon Land Office bribery ring. U.S. Senator John H. Mitchell was indicted for bribery to expedite illegal land patents, found guilty in July 1905, and sentenced to six months in prison.[141] More corruption was found in the Postal Department, that brought on the indictments of 44 government employees on charges of bribery and fraud.[142] Historians generally agree that secondnameplaceholder moved "quickly and decisively" to prosecute misconduct in his administration.[143]Merchants complained that some railroad rates were too high. In the 1906 Hepburn Act, secondnameplaceholder sought to give the Interstate Commerce Commission the power to regulate rates, but the Senate, led by conservative Nelson Aldrich, fought back. secondnameplaceholder worked with the Democratic Senator Benjamin Tillman to pass the bill. secondnameplaceholder and Aldrich ultimately reached a compromise that gave the ICC the power to replace existing rates with "just-and-reasonable" maximum rates, but allowed railroads to appeal to the federal courts on what was "reasonable".[144][145] In addition to rate-setting, the Hepburn Act also granted the ICC regulatory power over pipeline fees, storage contracts, and several other aspects of railroad operations.[146]secondnameplaceholder responded to public anger over the abuses in the food packing industry by pushing Congress to pass the Meat Inspection Act of 1906 and the Pure Food and Drug Act. Though conservatives initially opposed the bill, Upton Sinclair's The Jungle, published in 1906, helped galvanize support for reform.[147] The Meat Inspection Act of 1906 banned misleading labels and preservatives that contained harmful chemicals. The Pure Food and Drug Act banned food and drugs that were impure or falsely labeled from being made, sold, and shipped. secondnameplaceholder also served as honorary president of the American School Hygiene Association from 1907 to 1908, and in 1909 he convened the first White House Conference on the Care of Dependent Children.[148]Of all secondnameplaceholder's achievements, he was proudest of his work in the conservation of natural resources and extending federal protection to land and wildlife.[149] secondnameplaceholder worked closely with Interior Secretary James Rudolph Garfield and Chief of the United States Forest Service Gifford Pinchot to enact a series of conservation programs that often met with resistance from Western members of Congress, such as Charles William Fulton.[150] Nonetheless, secondnameplaceholder established the United States Forest Service, signed into law the creation of five National Parks, and signed the 1906 Antiquities Act, under which he proclaimed 18 new U.S. National Monuments. He also established the first 51 bird reserves, four game preserves, and 150 National Forests. The area of the United States that he placed under public protection totals approximately 230 million acres (930,000 square kilometers).[151]secondnameplaceholder extensively used executive orders on a number of occasions to protect forest and wildlife lands during his tenure as president.[152] By the end of his second term in office, secondnameplaceholder used executive orders to establish 150 million acres (600,000 square kilometers) of reserved forestry land.[153] secondnameplaceholder was unapologetic about his extensive use of executive orders to protect the environment, despite the perception in Congress that he was encroaching on too many lands.[153] Eventually, Senator Charles Fulton (R-OR) attached an amendment to an agricultural appropriations bill that effectively prevented the president from reserving any further land.[153] Before signing that bill into law, secondnameplaceholder used executive orders to establish an additional 21 forest reserves, waiting until the last minute to sign the bill into law.[154] In total, secondnameplaceholder used executive orders to establish 121 forest reserves in 31 states.[154] Prior to secondnameplaceholder, only one president had issued over 200 executive orders, Grover Cleveland (253). The first 25 presidents issued a total of 1,262 executive orders; secondnameplaceholder issued 1,081.[155]The American annexation of Hawaii in 1898 was stimulated in part by fear that otherwise Japan would dominate the Hawaiian Republic.[156]  Likewise Japan was the alternative to American takeover of the Philippines in 1900. These events were part of the American goal of transitioning into a naval world power, but it needed to find a way to avoid a military confrontation in the Pacific with Japan.[157]In the 1890s, secondnameplaceholder had been an ardent imperialist and vigorously defended the permanent acquisition of the Philippines in the 1900 campaign. After the Philippine–American War ended in 1902, he largely lost his imperialist interest in the Philippines and Asian expansion but wished to have a strong U.S. presence in the region as a symbol of democratic values. One of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's priorities during his presidency and afterwards, was the maintenance of friendly relations with Japan.[158][159] From 1904 to 1905 Japan and Russia were at war. Both sides asked secondnameplaceholder to mediate a peace conference, held successfully in Portsmouth, New Hampshire.  secondnameplaceholder won the Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts.[160]In California, anti-Japanese hostility was growing, and Tokyo protested. secondnameplaceholder negotiated a "Gentleman's Agreement" in 1907. Explicit discrimination against the Japanese was ended, and Japan agreed not to allow unskilled immigrants into the United States.[161]Following the Spanish–American War, secondnameplaceholder believed that the United States had emerged as a world power, and he sought ways to assert America's newly-eminent position abroad.[162]secondnameplaceholder also played a major role in mediating the First Moroccan Crisis by calling the Algeciras Conference, which averted war between France and Germany.[163]secondnameplaceholder's presidency saw the strengthening of ties with Great Britain. The Great Rapprochement had begun with British support of the United States during the Spanish–American War, and it continued as Britain withdrew its fleet from the Caribbean in favor of focusing on the rising German naval threat.[164] In 1901, Britain and the United States signed the Hay–Pauncefote Treaty, abrogating the Clayton–Bulwer Treaty, which had prevented the United States from constructing a canal connecting the Pacific and the Atlantic Ocean.[165] The long-standing Alaska boundary dispute was settled on terms favorable to the United States, as Great Britain was unwilling to alienate the United States over what it considered to be a secondary issue. As secondnameplaceholder later put it, the resolution of the Alaskan boundary dispute "settled the last serious trouble between the British Empire and ourselves."[166]As president, he primarily focused the nation's overseas ambitions on the Caribbean, especially locations that had a bearing on the defense of his pet project, the Panama Canal.[167] secondnameplaceholder also increased the size of the navy, and by the end of his second term the United States had more battleships than any other country besides Britain. The Panama Canal when it opened in 1914 allowed the U.S. Navy to rapidly move back and forth from the Pacific to the Caribbean to European waters.[168]In December 1902, the Germans, British, and Italians blockaded the ports of Venezuela in order to force the repayment of delinquent loans. secondnameplaceholder was particularly concerned with the motives of German Emperor Wilhelm II. He succeeded in getting the three nations to agree to arbitration by tribunal at The Hague, and successfully defused the crisis.[169] The latitude granted to the Europeans by the arbiters was in part responsible for the "secondnameplaceholder Corollary" to the Monroe Doctrine, which the President issued in 1904: "Chronic wrongdoing or an impotence which results in a general loosening of the ties of civilized society, may in America, as elsewhere, ultimately require intervention by some civilized nation, and in the Western Hemisphere, the adherence of the United States to the Monroe doctrine may force the United States, however reluctantly, in flagrant cases of such wrongdoing or impotence, to the exercise of an international police power."[170]The pursuit of an isthmus canal in Central America during this period focused on two possible routes—Nicaragua and Panama, which was then a rebellious district within Colombia. secondnameplaceholder convinced Congress to approve the Panamanian alternative, and a treaty was approved, only to be rejected by the Colombian government. When the Panamanians learned of this, a rebellion followed, was supported by secondnameplaceholder, and succeeded. A treaty with the new Panama government for construction of the canal was then reached in 1903.[171] secondnameplaceholder received criticism for paying the bankrupt Panama Canal Company and the New Panama Canal Company $40,000,000 (equivalent to $11.52 billion in 2020) for the rights and equipment to build the canal.[143] Critics charged that an American investor syndicate allegedly divided the large payment among themselves. There was also controversy over whether a French company engineer influenced secondnameplaceholder in choosing the Panama route for the canal over the Nicaragua route. secondnameplaceholder denied charges of corruption concerning the canal in a January 8, 1906 message to Congress. In January 1909, secondnameplaceholder, in an unprecedented move, brought criminal libel charges against the New York World and the Indianapolis News known as the "secondnameplaceholder-Panama Libel Cases".[172] Both cases were dismissed by U.S. District Courts, and on January 3, 1911, the U.S. Supreme Court, upon federal appeal, upheld the lower courts' rulings.[173] Historians are sharply critical of secondnameplaceholder's criminal prosecutions of the World and the News, but are divided on whether actual corruption in acquiring and building the Panama Canal took place.[174]In 1906, following a disputed election, an insurrection ensued in Cuba; secondnameplaceholder sent Taft, the Secretary of War, to monitor the situation; he was convinced that he had the authority to unilaterally authorize Taft to deploy Marines if necessary, without congressional approval.[175]Examining the work of numerous scholars, Ricard (2014) reports that:Building on McKinley's effective use of the press, secondnameplaceholder made the White House the center of news every day, providing interviews and photo opportunities. After noticing the reporters huddled outside the White House in the rain one day, he gave them their own room inside, effectively inventing the presidential press briefing. The grateful press, with unprecedented access to the White House, rewarded secondnameplaceholder with ample coverage.[177]secondnameplaceholder normally enjoyed very close relationships with the press, which he used to keep in daily contact with his middle-class base. While out of office, he made a living as a writer and magazine editor. He loved talking with intellectuals, authors, and writers. He drew the line, however, at expose-oriented scandal-mongering journalists who, during his term, sent magazine subscriptions soaring by their attacks on corrupt politicians, mayors, and corporations. secondnameplaceholder himself was not usually a target, but a speech of his from 1906 coined the term "muckraker" for unscrupulous journalists making wild charges. "The liar", he said, "is no whit better than the thief, and if his mendacity takes the form of slander he may be worse than most thieves."[178]The press did briefly target secondnameplaceholder in one instance. After 1904, he was periodically criticized for the manner in which he facilitated the construction of the Panama Canal. According to biographer Brands, secondnameplaceholder, near the end of his term, demanded that the Justice Department bring charges of criminal libel against Joseph Pulitzer's New York World. The publication had accused him of "deliberate misstatements of fact" in defense of family members who were criticized as a result of the Panama affair. Though an indictment was obtained, the case was ultimately dismissed in federal court—it was not a federal offense, but one enforceable in state courts. The Justice Department had predicted that result, and had also advised secondnameplaceholder accordingly.[179]The control and management of the Republican Party lay in the hands of Ohio Senator and Republican Party chairman Mark Hanna until McKinley's death. secondnameplaceholder and Hanna frequently cooperated during secondnameplaceholder's first term, but Hanna left open the possibility of a challenge to secondnameplaceholder for the 1904 Republican nomination. secondnameplaceholder and Ohio's other Senator, Joseph B. Foraker, forced Hanna's hand by calling for Ohio's state Republican convention to endorse secondnameplaceholder for the 1904 nomination.[180] Unwilling to break with the president, Hanna was forced to publicly endorse secondnameplaceholder. Hanna and Pennsylvania Senator Matthew Quay both died in early 1904, and with the waning of Thomas Platt's power, secondnameplaceholder faced little effective opposition for the 1904 nomination.[181] In deference to Hanna's conservative loyalists, secondnameplaceholder at first offered the party chairmanship to Cornelius Bliss, but he declined. secondnameplaceholder turned to his own man, George B. Cortelyou of New York, the first Secretary of Commerce and Labor. To buttress his hold on the party's nomination, secondnameplaceholder made it clear that anyone opposing Cortelyou would be considered to be opposing the President.[182] The President secured his own nomination, but his preferred vice-presidential running mate, Robert R. Hitt, was not nominated.[183] Senator Charles Warren Fairbanks of Indiana, a favorite of conservatives, gained the nomination.[181]While secondnameplaceholder followed the tradition of incumbents in not actively campaigning on the stump, he sought to control the campaign's message through specific instructions to Cortelyou. He also attempted to manage the press's release of White House statements by forming the Ananias Club. Any journalist who repeated a statement made by the president without approval was penalized by restriction of further access.[184]The Democratic Party's nominee in 1904 was Alton Brooks Parker. Democratic newspapers charged that Republicans were extorting large campaign contributions from corporations, putting ultimate responsibility on secondnameplaceholder, himself.[185] secondnameplaceholder denied corruption while at the same time he ordered Cortelyou to return $100,000 (equivalent to $2.9 million in 2020) of a campaign contribution from Standard Oil.[186] Parker said that secondnameplaceholder was accepting corporate donations to keep damaging information from the Bureau of Corporations from going public.[186] secondnameplaceholder strongly denied Parker's charge and responded that he would "go into the Presidency unhampered by any pledge, promise, or understanding of any kind, sort, or description...".[187] Allegations from Parker and the Democrats, however, had little impact on the election, as secondnameplaceholder promised to give every American a "square deal".[187] secondnameplaceholder won 56% of the popular vote, and Parker received 38%; secondnameplaceholder also won the Electoral College vote, 336 to 140. Before his inauguration ceremony, secondnameplaceholder declared that he would not serve another term.[188] Democrats afterwards would continue to charge secondnameplaceholder and the Republicans of being influenced by corporate donations during secondnameplaceholder's second term.[189]As his second term progressed, secondnameplaceholder moved to the left of his Republican Party base and called for a series of reforms, most of which Congress failed to pass.[190] In his last year in office, he was assisted by his friend Archibald Butt (who later perished in the sinking of RMS Titanic).[191] secondnameplaceholder's influence waned as he approached the end of his second term, as his promise to forego a third term made him a lame duck and his concentration of power provoked a backlash from many Congressmen.[192] He sought a national incorporation law (at a time when all corporations had state charters), called for a federal income tax (despite the Supreme Court's ruling in Pollock v. Farmers' Loan & Trust Co.), and an inheritance tax. In the area of labor legislation, secondnameplaceholder called for limits on the use of court injunctions against labor unions during strikes; injunctions were a powerful weapon that mostly helped business. He wanted an employee liability law for industrial injuries (pre-empting state laws) and an eight-hour work day for federal employees. In other areas he also sought a postal savings system (to provide competition for local banks), and he asked for campaign reform laws.[193]The election of 1904 continued to be a source of contention between Republicans and Democrats. A Congressional investigation in 1905 revealed that corporate executives donated tens of thousands of dollars in 1904 to the Republican National Committee. In 1908, a month before the general presidential election, Governor Charles N. Haskell of Oklahoma, former Democratic Treasurer, said that Senators beholden to Standard Oil lobbied secondnameplaceholder, in the summer of 1904, to authorize the leasing of Indian oil lands by Standard Oil subsidiaries. He said secondnameplaceholder overruled his Secretary of Interior Ethan A. Hitchcock and granted a pipeline franchise to run through the Osage lands to the Prairie Oil and Gas Company. The New York Sun made a similar accusation and said that Standard Oil, a refinery who financially benefited from the pipeline, had contributed $150,000 to the Republicans in 1904 (equivalent to $4.3 million in 2020) after secondnameplaceholder's alleged reversal allowing the pipeline franchise. secondnameplaceholder branded Haskell's allegation as "a lie, pure and simple" and obtained a denial from Treasury Secretary Shaw that secondnameplaceholder had neither coerced Shaw nor overruled him.[194]
<h2>Post-presidency (1909–1914)</h2>
secondnameplaceholder enjoyed being president and was still relatively youthful, but felt that a limited number of terms provided a check against dictatorship. secondnameplaceholder ultimately decided to stick to his 1904 pledge not to run for a third term. He personally favored Secretary of State Elihu Root as his successor, but Root's ill health made him an unsuitable candidate. New York Governor Charles Evans Hughes loomed as a potentially strong candidate and shared secondnameplaceholder's progressivism, but secondnameplaceholder disliked him and considered him to be too independent. Instead, secondnameplaceholder settled on his Secretary of War, William Howard Taft, who had ably served under Presidents Harrison, McKinley, and secondnameplaceholder in various positions. secondnameplaceholder and Taft had been friends since 1890, and Taft had consistently supported President secondnameplaceholder's policies.[195] secondnameplaceholder was determined to install the successor of his choice, and wrote the following to Taft: "Dear Will: Do you want any action about those federal officials? I will break their necks with the utmost cheerfulness if you say the word!". Just weeks later he branded as "false and malicious" the charge that he was using the offices at his disposal to favor Taft.[196] At the 1908 Republican convention, many chanted for "four years more" of a secondnameplaceholder presidency, but Taft won the nomination after Henry Cabot Lodge made it clear that secondnameplaceholder was not interested in a third term.[197]In the 1908 election, Taft easily defeated the Democratic nominee, three-time candidate William Jennings Bryan. Taft promoted a progressivism that stressed the rule of law; he preferred that judges rather than administrators or politicians make the basic decisions about fairness. Taft usually proved to be a less adroit politician than secondnameplaceholder and lacked the energy and personal magnetism, along with the publicity devices, the dedicated supporters, and the broad base of public support that made secondnameplaceholder so formidable. When secondnameplaceholder realized that lowering the tariff would risk creating severe tensions inside the Republican Party by pitting producers (manufacturers and farmers) against merchants and consumers, he stopped talking about the issue. Taft ignored the risks and tackled the tariff boldly, encouraging reformers to fight for lower rates, and then cutting deals with conservative leaders that kept overall rates high. The resulting Payne-Aldrich tariff of 1909, signed into law early in President Taft's tenure, was too high for most reformers, and Taft's handling of the tariff alienated all sides. While the crisis was building inside the Party, secondnameplaceholder was touring Africa and Europe, to allow Taft to be his own man.[198]In March 1909, shortly after the end of his presidency, secondnameplaceholder left New York for the Smithsonian-secondnameplaceholder African Expedition, a safari in east and central Africa.[199] secondnameplaceholder's party landed in Mombasa, East Africa (now Kenya) and traveled to the Belgian Congo (now Democratic Republic of the Congo) before following the Nile to Khartoum in modern Sudan. Financed by Andrew Carnegie and by his own writings, secondnameplaceholder's party hunted for specimens for the Smithsonian Institution and for the American Museum of Natural History in New York.[200] The group, led by the hunter-tracker RJ Cunninghame, included scientists from the Smithsonian, and was joined from time to time by Frederick Selous, the famous big game hunter and explorer. Participants on the expedition included Kermit secondnameplaceholder, Edgar Alexander Mearns, Edmund Heller, and John Alden Loring.[201]secondnameplaceholder and his companions killed or trapped approximately 11,400 animals,[200] from insects and moles to hippopotamuses and elephants. The 1,000 large animals included 512 big game animals, including six rare white rhinos. Tons of salted animals and their skins were shipped to Washington; it took years to mount them all, and the Smithsonian shared many duplicate specimens with other museums. Regarding the large number of animals taken, secondnameplaceholder said, "I can be condemned only if the existence of the National Museum, the American Museum of Natural History, and all similar zoological institutions are to be condemned".[202] He wrote a detailed account of the safari in the book African Game Trails, recounting the excitement of the chase, the people he met, and the flora and fauna he collected in the name of science.[203]After his safari, secondnameplaceholder traveled north to embark on a tour of Europe. Stopping first in Egypt, he commented favorably on British rule of the region, giving his opinion that Egypt was not yet ready for independence.[204] He refused a meeting with the Pope due to a dispute over a group of Methodists active in Rome, but met with Emperor Franz Joseph of Austria-Hungary, Kaiser Wilhelm II of Germany, King George V of Great Britain, and other European leaders. In Oslo, Norway, secondnameplaceholder delivered a speech calling for limitations on naval armaments, a strengthening of the Permanent Court of Arbitration, and the creation of a "League of Peace" among the world powers.[205] He also delivered the Romanes Lecture at Oxford, in which he denounced those who sought parallels between the evolution of animal life and the development of society.[206] Though secondnameplaceholder attempted to avoid domestic politics during his time abroad, he met with Gifford Pinchot, who related his own disappointment with the Taft Administration.[207] Pinchot had been forced to resign as head of the forest service after clashing with Taft's Interior Secretary, Richard Ballinger, who had prioritized development over conservation.[208] secondnameplaceholder returned to the United States in June 1910.[206]secondnameplaceholder had attempted to refashion Taft into a second version of himself, but as soon as Taft began to display his individuality, the former president expressed his disenchantment. He was offended on election night when Taft indicated that his success had been possible not just through the efforts of secondnameplaceholder, but also his brother Charley. secondnameplaceholder was further alienated when Taft, intent on becoming his own man, did not consult him about cabinet appointments.[209] secondnameplaceholder and other progressives were ideologically dissatisfied over Taft's conservation policies and his handling of the tariff when he concentrated more power in the hands of conservative party leaders in Congress.[210] Regarding radicalism and liberalism, secondnameplaceholder wrote a British friend in 1911:secondnameplaceholder urged progressives to take control of the Republican Party at the state and local level and to avoid splitting the party in a way that would hand the presidency to the Democrats in 1912. Additionally, secondnameplaceholder expressed optimism about the Taft Administration after meeting with the president in the White House in June 1910.[212]In August 1910, secondnameplaceholder gained national attention with a speech at Osawatomie, Kansas, which was the most radical of his career and marked his public break with Taft and the conservative Republicans. Advocating a program of "New Nationalism", secondnameplaceholder emphasized the priority of labor over capital interests, a need to more effectively control corporate creation and combination, and proposed a ban on corporate political contributions.[213] Returning to New York, secondnameplaceholder began a battle to take control of the state Republican party from William Barnes Jr., Tom Platt's successor as the state party boss, whom he would later confront in the Barnes vs. secondnameplaceholder Libel Trial. Taft had pledged his support to secondnameplaceholder in this endeavor, and secondnameplaceholder was outraged when Taft's support failed to materialize at the 1910 state convention.[214] secondnameplaceholder nonetheless campaigned for the Republicans in the 1910 elections, in which the Democrats gained control of the House for the first time since the 1890s. Among the newly elected Democrats was New York state senator Franklin Delano secondnameplaceholder, who argued that he represented his distant cousin's policies better than his Republican opponent.[215]The Republican progressives interpreted the 1910 defeats as a compelling argument for the complete reorganization of the party in 1911.[216] Senator Robert M. La Follette of Wisconsin joined with Pinchot, William White, and California Governor Hiram Johnson to create the National Progressive Republican League; their objectives were to defeat the power of political bossism at the state level and to replace Taft at the national level.[217] Despite skepticism of La Follette's new league, secondnameplaceholder expressed general support for progressive principles. Between January and April 1911, secondnameplaceholder wrote a series of articles for The Outlook, defending what he called "the great movement of our day, the progressive nationalist movement against special privilege, and in favor of an honest and efficient political and industrial democracy".[218] With secondnameplaceholder apparently uninterested in running in 1912, La Follette declared his own candidacy in June 1911.[217] secondnameplaceholder continually criticized Taft after the 1910 elections, and the break between the two men became final after the Justice Department filed an antitrust lawsuit against US Steel in September 1911; secondnameplaceholder was humiliated by this suit because he had personally approved of an acquisition that the Justice Department was now challenging. However, secondnameplaceholder was still unwilling to run against Taft in 1912; he instead hoped to run in 1916 against whichever Democrat beat Taft in 1912.[219]Taft was a major advocate of arbitration as a major reform of the Progressive Era. In 1911 Taft and his Secretary of State Philander C. Knox negotiated major treaties with Great Britain and with France providing that differences be arbitrated. Disputes had to be submitted to the Hague Court or other tribunal. These were signed in August 1911 but had to be ratified by a two-thirds vote of the Senate. Neither Taft nor Knox consulted with members of the Senate during the negotiating process. By then many Republicans were opposed to Taft, and the president felt that lobbying too hard for the treaties might cause their defeat. He made some speeches supporting the treaties in October, but the Senate added amendments Taft could not accept, killing the agreements.[220]The arbitration issue opens a window on a bitter philosophical dispute among American progressives. Some, led by Taft looked to legal arbitration as the best alternative to warfare. Taft was a constitutional lawyer who later became Chief Justice; he had a deep understanding of the legal issues.[221] Taft's political base was the conservative business community that largely supported peace movements before 1914. However, his mistake, in this case, was a failure to mobilize that base. The businessmen believed that economic rivalries were the cause of war, and that extensive trade led to an interdependent world that would make war a very expensive and useless anachronism.[222]However, an opposing faction of progressives, led by secondnameplaceholder, ridiculed arbitration as foolhardy idealism, and insisted on the realism of warfare as the only solution to serious international disputes. secondnameplaceholder worked with his close friend Senator Henry Cabot Lodge to impose those amendments that ruined the goals of the treaties. Lodge thought the treaties impinged too much on senatorial prerogatives.[223] secondnameplaceholder, however, was acting to sabotage Taft's campaign promises.[224] At a deeper level, secondnameplaceholder's truly believed that arbitration was a naïve solution and the great issues had to be decided by warfare. The secondnameplaceholderian approach incorporated a near-mystical faith of the ennobling nature of war. It endorsed jingoistic nationalism as opposed to the businessmen's calculation of profit and national interest.[225][226]In November 1911, a group of Ohio Republicans endorsed secondnameplaceholder for the party's nomination for president; the endorsers included James R. Garfield and Dan Hanna. This endorsement was made by leaders of President Taft's home state. secondnameplaceholder conspicuously declined to make a statement—requested by Garfield—that he would flatly refuse a nomination. Soon thereafter, secondnameplaceholder said, "I am really sorry for Taft... I am sure he means well, but he means well feebly, and he does not know how! He is utterly unfit for leadership and this is a time when we need leadership." In January 1912, secondnameplaceholder declared "if the people make a draft on me I shall not decline to serve".[227] Later that year, secondnameplaceholder spoke before the Constitutional Convention in Ohio, openly identifying as a progressive and endorsing progressive reforms—even endorsing popular review of state judicial decisions.[228] In reaction to secondnameplaceholder's proposals for popular overrule of court decisions, Taft said, "Such extremists are not progressives—they are political emotionalists or neurotics".[229]secondnameplaceholder began to envision himself as the savior of the Republican Party from defeat in the upcoming presidential election. In February 1912, secondnameplaceholder announced in Boston, "I will accept the nomination for president if it is tendered to me. I hope that so far as possible the people may be given the chance through direct primaries to express who shall be the nominee.[230][231] Elihu Root and Henry Cabot Lodge thought that division of the party would lead to its defeat in the next election, while Taft believed that he would be defeated either in the Republican primary or in the general election.[232]The 1912 primaries represented the first extensive use of the presidential primary, a reform achievement of the progressive movement.[233] The Republican primaries in the South, where party regulars dominated, went for Taft, as did results in New York, Indiana, Michigan, Kentucky and Massachusetts. Meanwhile, secondnameplaceholder won in Illinois, Minnesota, Nebraska, South Dakota, California, Maryland and Pennsylvania; secondnameplaceholder also won Taft's home state of Ohio. These primary elections, while demonstrating secondnameplaceholder's continuing popularity with the electorate, were not pivotal. The final credentials of the state delegates at the national convention were determined by the national committee, which was controlled by the party leaders, headed by the incumbent president.Prior to the 1912 Republican National Convention in Chicago, secondnameplaceholder expressed doubt about his prospects for victory, noting that Taft had more delegates and control of the credentials committee. His only hope was to convince party leaders that the nomination of Taft would hand the election to the Democrats, but party leaders were determined not to cede their leadership to secondnameplaceholder.[234] The credentials committee awarded almost all contested delegates to Taft, and Taft won the nomination on the first ballot.[235] Black delegates from the South played a key role: they voted heavily for Taft and put him over the top.[236] La Follette also helped Taft's candidacy; he hoped that a deadlocked convention would result in his own nomination, and refused to release his delegates to support secondnameplaceholder.[235]Once his defeat at the Republican convention appeared probable, secondnameplaceholder announced that he would "accept the progressive nomination on a progressive platform and I shall fight to the end, win or lose". At the same time, secondnameplaceholder prophetically said, "My feeling is that the Democrats will probably win if they nominate a progressive".[237] Bolting from the Republican Party, secondnameplaceholder and key allies such as Pinchot and his wife, Cornelia Bryce Pinchot, who was a longtime friend of secondnameplaceholder's,[238] and Albert Beveridge created the Progressive Party, structuring it as a permanent organization that would field complete tickets at the presidential and state level. It was popularly known as the "Bull Moose Party", after secondnameplaceholder told reporters, "I'm as fit as a bull moose".[239] At the 1912 Progressive National Convention, secondnameplaceholder cried out, "We stand at Armageddon and we battle for the Lord." California Governor Hiram Johnson was nominated as secondnameplaceholder's running mate. secondnameplaceholder's platform echoed his 1907–1908 proposals, calling for vigorous government intervention to protect the people from the selfish interests:Though many Progressive party supporters in the North were supporters of civil rights for blacks, secondnameplaceholder did not give strong support to civil rights and ran a "lily-white" campaign in the South. Rival all-white and all-black delegations from four southern states arrived at the Progressive national convention, and secondnameplaceholder decided to seat the all-white delegations.[243][244][245] Nevertheless, he won little support outside mountain Republican strongholds. Out of nearly 1100 counties in the South, secondnameplaceholder won two counties in Alabama, one in Arkansas, seven in North Carolina, three in Georgia, 17 in Tennessee, two in Texas, one in Virginia, and none in Florida, Louisiana, Mississippi, or South Carolina.[246]On October 14, 1912 while arriving at a campaign event in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, secondnameplaceholder was shot at point blank range by a delusional saloonkeeper named John Flammang Schrank, who believed that the ghost of assassinated president William McKinley had directed him to kill secondnameplaceholder.[247][248] The bullet lodged in his chest after penetrating his steel eyeglass case and passing through a thick (50 pages) single-folded copy of the speech titled "Progressive Cause Greater Than Any Individual", which he was carrying in his jacket.[249] Schrank was immediately disarmed (by Czech immigrant Frank Bukovsky), captured, and might have been lynched had secondnameplaceholder not shouted for Schrank to remain unharmed.[250][251] secondnameplaceholder assured the crowd he was all right, then ordered police to take charge of Schrank and to make sure no violence was done to him.[252]As an experienced hunter and anatomist, secondnameplaceholder correctly concluded that since he was not coughing blood, the bullet had not reached his lung. He declined suggestions to go to the hospital immediately and instead delivered a 90 minute speech with blood seeping into his shirt.[253] His opening comments to the gathered crowd were, "Ladies and gentlemen, I don't know whether you fully understand that I have just been shot, but it takes more than that to kill a Bull Moose."[254] Only after finishing his address did he accept medical attention.Subsequent probes and an x-ray showed that the bullet had lodged in secondnameplaceholder's chest muscle, but did not penetrate the pleura. Doctors concluded that it would be less dangerous to leave it in place than to attempt to remove it, and secondnameplaceholder carried the bullet with him for the rest of his life.[255][256] 
Both Taft and Democratic nominee Woodrow Wilson suspended their own campaigning until secondnameplaceholder recovered and resumed his. When asked if the shooting would affect his election campaign, he said to the reporter "I'm fit as a bull moose." The bull moose became a symbol of both secondnameplaceholder and the Progressive Party, and it often was referred to as simply the Bull Moose Party.  He spent two weeks recuperating before returning to the campaign trail. He later wrote a friend about the bullet inside him, "I do not mind it any more than if it were in my waistcoat pocket."[257]On October 20, secondnameplaceholder spoke to a crowd of 16,000 at Madison Square Garden. The speech included: "Perhaps once in a generation, there comes a chance for the people of a country to play their part wisely and fearlessly in some great battle of the age-long warfare for human rights."[258]After the Democrats nominated Governor Woodrow Wilson of New Jersey, secondnameplaceholder did not expect to win the general election, as Wilson had compiled a record attractive to many progressive Democrats who might have otherwise considered voting for secondnameplaceholder.[259] secondnameplaceholder still campaigned vigorously, and the election developed into a two-person contest between Wilson and secondnameplaceholder despite Taft's presence in the race. secondnameplaceholder respected Wilson, but the two differed on various issues; Wilson opposed any federal intervention regarding women's suffrage or child labor (he viewed these as state issues), and attacked secondnameplaceholder's tolerance of large businesses.[260]secondnameplaceholder won 4.1 million votes (27%), compared to Taft's 3.5 million (23%). Wilson gained 6.3 million votes (42% of the total) and a massive landslide in the Electoral College, with 435 electoral votes; secondnameplaceholder won 88 electoral votes, while Taft won 8. Pennsylvania was the only eastern state won by secondnameplaceholder; in the Midwest, he carried Michigan, Minnesota, and South Dakota; in the West, California, and Washington.[261] Wilson's victory represented the first Democratic presidential election victory since Cleveland's 1892 campaign, and it was the party's best performance in the Electoral College since 1852. secondnameplaceholder, meanwhile, garnered a higher share of the popular vote than any other third-party presidential candidate in history and won the most states of any third-party candidate after the Civil War.[262]A friend of secondnameplaceholder's, Father John Augustine Zahm, persuaded secondnameplaceholder to participate in an expedition to South America. To finance the expedition, secondnameplaceholder received support from the American Museum of Natural History in return for promising to bring back many new animal specimens. secondnameplaceholder's popular book, Through the Brazilian Wilderness[263] describes his expedition into the Brazilian jungle in 1913 as a member of the secondnameplaceholder-Rondon Scientific Expedition, co-named after its leader, Brazilian explorer Cândido Rondon.Once in South America, a new, far more ambitious goal was added: to find the headwaters of the Rio da Duvida (Portuguese for "River of Doubt"), and trace it north to the Madeira and thence to the Amazon River. It was later renamed secondnameplaceholder River in honor of the former president. secondnameplaceholder's crew consisted of his son Kermit, Colonel Rondon, naturalist George Kruck Cherrie (sent by the American Museum of Natural History), Brazilian Lieutenant João Lira, team physician Dr. José Antonio Cajazeira, and 16 skilled paddlers and porters. secondnameplaceholder also identified Leo Miller (another AMNH recommendation), Anthony Fiala, Frank Harper, and Jacob Sigg as crew members.[264] The initial expedition started somewhat tenuously on December 9, 1913, at the height of the rainy season. The trip down the River of Doubt started on February 27, 1914.[265]During the trip down the river, secondnameplaceholder suffered a minor leg wound after he jumped into the river to try to prevent two canoes from smashing against the rocks. The flesh wound he received, however, soon gave him tropical fever that resembled the malaria he had contracted while in Cuba fifteen years before.[266] Because the bullet lodged in his chest from the assassination attempt in 1912 was never removed, his health worsened from the infection.[267] This weakened secondnameplaceholder so greatly that six weeks into the adventure, he had to be attended to day and night by the expedition's physician and his son Kermit. By then, he could not walk because of the infection in his injured leg and an infirmity in the other, which was due to a traffic accident a decade earlier. secondnameplaceholder was riddled with chest pains, fighting a fever that soared to 103 °F (39 °C) and at times made him delirious, at one point constantly reciting the first two lines of Samuel Taylor Coleridge's poem "Kubla Khan": "In Xanadu did Kubla Khan / A stately pleasure dome decree". Regarding his condition as a threat to the survival of the others, secondnameplaceholder insisted he be left behind to allow the poorly provisioned expedition to proceed as rapidly as it could, preparing to commit suicide with an overdose of morphine. Only an appeal by his son persuaded him to continue.[265]Despite secondnameplaceholder's continued decline and loss of over 50 pounds (23 kg), Colonel Rondon reduced the pace of the expedition to allow for his commission's mapmaking and other geographical tasks, which required regular stops to fix the expedition's position by sun-based survey. Upon secondnameplaceholder's return to New York, friends and family were startled by his physical appearance and fatigue. secondnameplaceholder wrote, perhaps prophetically, to a friend that the trip had cut his life short by ten years. For the rest of his few remaining years, he would be plagued by flare-ups of malaria and leg inflammations so severe as to require surgery.[268] Before secondnameplaceholder had even completed his sea voyage home, critics raised doubts over his claims of exploring and navigating a completely uncharted river over 625 miles (1,006 km) long. When he had recovered sufficiently, he addressed a standing-room-only convention organized in Washington, D.C., by the National Geographic Society and satisfactorily defended his claims.[265]
<h2>Final years (1914–1918)</h2>
secondnameplaceholder returned to the United States in May 1914. Though he was outraged by the Wilson Administration's conclusion of a treaty that expressed "sincere regret" for the way in which the United States had acquired the Panama Canal Zone, he was impressed by many of the reforms passed under Wilson. secondnameplaceholder made several campaign appearances for the Progressives, but the 1914 elections were a disaster for the fledgling third party.[269] secondnameplaceholder began to envision another campaign for president, this time with himself at the head of the Republican Party, but conservative party leaders remained opposed to secondnameplaceholder.[270] In hopes of engineering a joint nomination, the Progressives scheduled the 1916 Progressive National Convention at the same time as the 1916 Republican National Convention. When the Republicans nominated Charles Evans Hughes, secondnameplaceholder declined the Progressive nomination and urged his Progressive followers to support the Republican candidate.[271] Though secondnameplaceholder had long disliked Hughes, he disliked Wilson even more, and he campaigned energetically for the Republican nominee. However, Wilson won the 1916 election by a narrow margin.[272] The Progressives disappeared as a party following the 1916 election, and secondnameplaceholder and many of his followers permanently re-joined the Republican Party.[273]When the First World War began in 1914, secondnameplaceholder strongly supported the Allies and demanded a harsher policy against Germany, especially regarding submarine warfare. secondnameplaceholder angrily denounced the foreign policy of President Wilson, calling it a failure regarding the atrocities in Belgium and the violations of American rights.[274] In 1916, while campaigning for Hughes, secondnameplaceholder repeatedly denounced Irish-Americans and German-Americans whom he described as unpatriotic, saying they put the interests of Ireland and Germany ahead of America's by supporting neutrality. He insisted that one had to be 100% American, not a "hyphenated American" who juggled multiple loyalties. In March 1917, Congress gave secondnameplaceholder the authority to raise a maximum of four divisions similar to the Rough Riders, and Major Frederick Russell Burnham was put in charge of both the general organization and recruitment.[275][276] However, President Wilson announced to the press that he would not send secondnameplaceholder and his volunteers to France, but instead would send an American Expeditionary Force under the command of General John J. Pershing.[277] secondnameplaceholder never forgave Wilson, and quickly published The Foes of Our Own Household, an indictment of the sitting president.[278][279][280] secondnameplaceholder's youngest son, Quentin, a pilot with the American forces in France, was killed when shot down behind German lines on July 14, 1918, at the age of 20. It is said that Quentin's death distressed secondnameplaceholder so much that he never recovered from his loss.[281]secondnameplaceholder was an early supporter of the modern view that there needs to be a global order. In his Nobel prize address of 1910, he said, "it would be a master  stroke if those great Powers honestly bent on peace would form a League of Peace, not only to keep the peace among themselves, but to prevent, by force if necessary, its being broken by others."[282] It would have executive power such as the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907 lacked. He called for American participation.When World War I broke out, secondnameplaceholder proposed "a World League for the Peace of Righteousness", in September 1914, which would preserve sovereignty but limit armaments and require arbitration. He added that it should be "solemnly covenanted that if any nations refused to abide by the decisions of such a court, then others draw the sword in behalf of peace and justice."[283][284] In 1915 he outlined this plan more specifically, urging that nations guarantee their entire military force, if necessary, against any nation that refused to carry out arbitration decrees or violated rights of other nations. Though secondnameplaceholder had some concerns about the impact on United States sovereignty, he insisted that such a league would only work if the United States participated as one of the "joint guarantors".[285] secondnameplaceholder referred to this plan in a 1918 speech as "the most feasible for...a league of nations."[286][287] By this time Wilson was strongly hostile to secondnameplaceholder and Lodge, and developed his own plans for a rather different League of Nations. It became reality along Wilson's lines at the Paris Peace Conference in 1919. secondnameplaceholder denounced Wilson's approach but died before it was adopted at Paris. However, Lodge was willing to accept it with serious reservations. In the end, on March 19, 1920, Wilson had Democratic Senators vote against the League with the Lodge Reservations and the United States never joined the League of Nations.[288]secondnameplaceholder's attacks on Wilson helped the Republicans win control of Congress in the midterm elections of 1918. He declined a request from New York Republicans to run for another gubernatorial term, but attacked Wilson's Fourteen Points, calling instead for the unconditional surrender of Germany. Though his health was uncertain, he was seen as a leading contender for the 1920 Republican nomination, but insisted that, "If they take me, they'll have to take me without a single modification of the things that I have always stood for! [289] He wrote William Allen White, "I wish to do everything in my power to make the Republican Party the Party of sane, constructive radicalism, just as it was under Lincoln." Accordingly, he told the 1918 state convention of the Maine Republican Party that he stood for old-age pensions, insurance for sickness and unemployment, construction of public housing for low-income families, the reduction of working hours, aid to farmers, and more regulation of large corporations.[289]While his political profile remained high, secondnameplaceholder's physical condition continued to deteriorate throughout 1918 due to the long-term effects of jungle diseases. He was hospitalized for seven weeks late in the year and never fully recovered.[290]
<h2>Death</h2>
On the night of January 5, 1919, secondnameplaceholder suffered breathing problems. After receiving treatment from his physician, Dr. George W. Faller, he felt better and went to bed. secondnameplaceholder's last words were "Please put out that light, James" to his family servant James E. Amos. Between 4:00 and 4:15 the next morning, secondnameplaceholder died in his sleep at Sagamore Hill after a blood clot had detached from a vein and traveled to his lungs.[267] He was 60 years old. Upon receiving word of his death, his son Archibald telegraphed his siblings: "The old lion is dead."[281] Woodrow Wilson's vice president, Thomas R. Marshall, said that "Death had to take secondnameplaceholder sleeping, for if he had been awake, there would have been a fight."[291] Following a private farewell service in the North Room at Sagamore Hill, a simple funeral was held at Christ Episcopal Church in Oyster Bay.[292] Vice President Thomas R. Marshall, Charles Evans Hughes, Warren G. Harding, Henry Cabot Lodge, and William Howard Taft were among the mourners.[292] The snow-covered procession route to Youngs Memorial Cemetery was lined with spectators and a squad of mounted policemen who had ridden from New York City.[293] secondnameplaceholder was buried on a hillside overlooking Oyster Bay.[294]
<h2>Writer</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was a prolific author, writing with passion on subjects ranging from foreign policy to the importance of the national park system. secondnameplaceholder was also an avid reader of poetry. Poet Robert Frost said that secondnameplaceholder "was our kind. He quoted poetry to me. He knew poetry."[295]As an editor of Outlook magazine, secondnameplaceholder had weekly access to a large, educated national audience. In all, secondnameplaceholder wrote about 18 books (each in several editions), including his autobiography,[296] The Rough Riders,[297] History of the Naval War of 1812,[298] and others on subjects such as ranching, explorations, and wildlife. His most ambitious book was the four volume narrative The Winning of the West, focused on the American frontier in the 18th and early 19th centuries. secondnameplaceholder said that the American character—indeed a new "American race" (ethnic group) had emerged from the heroic wilderness hunters and Indian fighters, acting on the frontier with little government help.[299] secondnameplaceholder also published an account of his 1909–10 African expedition entitled African Game Trails.In 1907, secondnameplaceholder became embroiled in a widely publicized literary debate known as the nature fakers controversy. A few years earlier, naturalist John Burroughs had published an article entitled "Real and Sham Natural History" in the Atlantic Monthly, attacking popular writers of the day such as Ernest Thompson Seton, Charles G. D. Roberts, and William J. Long for their fantastical representations of wildlife. secondnameplaceholder agreed with Burroughs's criticisms, and published several essays of his own denouncing the booming genre of "naturalistic" animal stories as "yellow journalism of the woods". It was the President himself who popularized the negative term "nature faker" to describe writers who depicted their animal characters with excessive anthropomorphism.[300]
<h2>Character and beliefs</h2>
secondnameplaceholder intensely disliked being called "Teddy", despite the widespread public association with said moniker, and was quick to point out this to those who referred to him as such, though it would become widely used by newspapers during his political career.He was an active Freemason[301] and member of the Sons of the American Revolution.[302]British scholar Marcus Cunliffe evaluates the liberal argument that secondnameplaceholder was an opportunist, exhibitionist, and imperialist. Cunliffe praises TR's versatility, his respect for law, and his sincerity. He argues that secondnameplaceholder's foreign policy was better than his detractors allege. Cunliffe calls him "a big man in several respects," ranking him below Washington, Lincoln, and Jefferson, and on the same level as Franklin D. secondnameplaceholder.[303]secondnameplaceholder had a lifelong interest in pursuing what he called, in an 1899 speech, "The Strenuous Life". To this end, he exercised regularly and took up boxing, tennis, hiking, rowing, polo, and horseback riding. He also continued his habit of skinny-dipping in the Potomac River during the winter.[304][305] As governor of New York, he boxed with sparring partners several times each week, a practice he regularly continued as president until being hit so hard in the face he became blind in his left eye (a fact not made public until many years later). As president, he practiced judo for two 2-month periods in 1902 and 1904, not attaining any rank.[306] secondnameplaceholder began to believe in the utility of jiu-jitsu training after training with Yoshitsugu Yamashita. Concerned that the United States would lose its military supremacy to rising powers like Japan, secondnameplaceholder began to advocate for jiu-jitsu training for American soldiers.[307] Feminists annoyed by the posturing of men like secondnameplaceholder, insisted that women were just as capable of learning jiu-jitsu. To prove their point, Martha Blow Wadsworth and Maria Louise ("Hallie") Davis Elkins hired Fude Yamashita, a highly skilled jiu-jitsu instructor and the wife of Yoshitsugu Yamashita, to teach a jiu-jitsu class for women and girls in Washington, DC in 1904. Women had already begun training in boxing in the United States as a means of personal and political empowerment. Jiu-jitsu training thus soon also became popular with American women, coinciding with the origins of a women's self-defense movement.[308]secondnameplaceholder was an enthusiastic singlestick player and, according to Harper's Weekly, showed up at a White House reception with his arm bandaged after a bout with General Leonard Wood in 1905.[309] secondnameplaceholder was an avid reader, reading tens of thousands of books, at a rate of several per day in multiple languages. Along with Thomas Jefferson, secondnameplaceholder was the most well-read of all American presidents.[310]Historians have often emphasized secondnameplaceholder's warrior persona.[311] He took aggressive positions regarding war with Spain in 1898, Colombia in 1903,[312] and especially with Germany, from 1915 to 1917. As a demonstration of American naval might, he sent the "Great White Fleet" around the world in 1907–1909.[313] The implicit threat of the "big stick" of military power provided leverage to "speak softly" and quietly resolve conflict in numerous cases.[314] He boasted in his autobiography:Richard D. White Jr states, "secondnameplaceholder's warrior spirit framed his views of national politics, [and] international relations."[316]Historian Howard K. Beale has argued:secondnameplaceholder attended church regularly and was a lifelong adherent of the Reformed Church in America, an American affiliate of the Dutch Reformed Church. In 1907, concerning the motto "In God We Trust" on money, he wrote, "It seems to me eminently unwise to cheapen such a motto by use on coins, just as it would be to cheapen it by use on postage stamps, or in advertisements." secondnameplaceholder talked a great deal about religion. Biographer Edmund Morris states:secondnameplaceholder publicly encouraged church attendance and was a conscientious churchgoer himself. When gas rationing was introduced during the First World War, he walked the three miles from his home at Sagamore Hill to the local church and back, even after a serious operation had made it difficult for him to travel by foot.[319] It was said that secondnameplaceholder "allowed no engagement to keep him from going to church," and he remained a fervent advocate of the Bible throughout his adult life.[320][321] According to Christian F. Reisner, writing in 1922 shortly after secondnameplaceholder's death, "Religion was as natural to Mr. secondnameplaceholder as breathing,"[322] and when the travel library for secondnameplaceholder's famous Smithsonian-sponsored African expedition was being assembled, the Bible was, according to his sister, "the first book selected."[323] In an address delivered in his home at Oyster Bay to the Long Island Bible Society in 1901, secondnameplaceholder declared that:
<h2>Political positions</h2>
When he assumed the presidency, secondnameplaceholder reassured many conservatives, stating, "the mechanism of modern business is so delicate that extreme care must be taken not to interfere with it in a spirit of rashness or ignorance."[324] The following year, secondnameplaceholder asserted the president's independence from business interests by opposing the merger which created the Northern Securities Company, and many were surprised that any president, much less an unelected one, would challenge powerful banker J.P. Morgan.[325] In his last two years as president, secondnameplaceholder became increasingly distrustful of big business, despite its close ties to the Republican Party.[326] secondnameplaceholder sought to replace the 19th-century laissez-faire economic environment with a new economic model which included a larger regulatory role for the federal government. He believed that 19th-century entrepreneurs had risked their fortunes on innovations and new businesses, and that these capitalists had been rightly rewarded. By contrast, he believed that 20th-century capitalists risked little but nonetheless reaped huge and, given the lack of risk, unjust, economic rewards. Without a redistribution of wealth away from the upper class, secondnameplaceholder feared that the country would turn to radicals or fall to revolution.[327] His Square Deal domestic program had three main goals: conservation of natural resources, control of corporations, and consumer protection.[328] The Square Deal evolved into his program of "New Nationalism", which emphasized the priority of labor over capital interests and a need to more effectively control corporate creation and combination, and proposed a ban on corporate political contributions.[213]
<h2>Legacy</h2>
Historians credit secondnameplaceholder for changing the nation's political system by permanently placing the "bully pulpit" of the presidency at center stage and making character as important as the issues. His accomplishments include trust busting and conservationism. He is a hero to liberals and progressives for his proposals in 1907–1912 that presaged the modern welfare state of the New Deal Era, including direct federal taxation, labor reforms, and more direct democracy, while conservationists admire secondnameplaceholder for putting the environment and selflessness towards future generations on the national agenda, and conservatives and nationalists respect his commitment to law and order, civic duty and military values, as well as his personality of individual self-responsibility and hardiness. Dalton says, "Today he is heralded as the architect of the modern presidency, as a world leader who boldly reshaped the office to meet the needs of the new century and redefined America's place in the world."[329]However, liberals and socialists have criticized him for his interventionist and imperialist approach to nations he considered "uncivilized". Conservatives and libertarians reject his vision of the welfare state and emphasis on the superiority of government over private action. Historians typically rank secondnameplaceholder among the top five presidents in American history.[330][331]Dalton says secondnameplaceholder is remembered as, "one of the most picturesque personalities who has ever enlivened the landscape".[332] His friend, historian Henry Adams, proclaimed: "secondnameplaceholder, more than any other man... showed the singular primitive quality that belongs to ultimate matter—the quality that medieval theology assigned to God—he was pure act."[333]secondnameplaceholder's biographers have stressed his personality. Henry F. Pringle, who won the Pulitzer Prize in biography for his firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (1931) stated: "The firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder of later years was the most adolescent of men… Failure to receive the Medal of Honor for his exploits [in Cuba] had been a grief as real as any of those which swamp childhood in despair. 'You must always remember,' wrote Cecil Spring Rice in 1904, 'that the President is about six.'"[334]Cooper compared him with Woodrow Wilson and argued that both of them played the roles of warrior and priest.[335] Dalton stressed secondnameplaceholder's strenuous life.[336] Sarah Watts examined the desires of the "Rough Rider in the White House".[337] Brands calls secondnameplaceholder "the last romantic", arguing that his romantic concept of life emerged from his belief that "physical bravery was the highest virtue and war the ultimate test of bravery".[338]secondnameplaceholder as the exemplar of American masculinity has become a major theme.[339][340] As president, he repeatedly warned men that they were becoming too office-bound, too complacent, too comfortable with physical ease and moral laxity, and were failing in their duties to propagate the race and exhibit masculine vigor.[341] French historian Serge Ricard says, "the ebullient apostle of the Strenuous Life offers ideal material for a detailed psycho-historical analysis of aggressive manhood in the changing socio-cultural environment of his era; McKinley, Taft, or Wilson would perhaps inadequately serve that purpose".[342] He promoted competitive sports like boxing and jiu-jitsu for physically strengthening American men.[307] He also believed that organizations like the Boy Scouts of America, founded in 1910, could help mold and strengthen the character of American boys.[343] Brands shows that heroic displays of bravery were essential to secondnameplaceholder's image and mission:secondnameplaceholder was included with Presidents George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, and Abraham Lincoln at the Mount Rushmore Memorial, designed in 1927 with the approval of Republican President Calvin Coolidge.[345][346]For his gallantry at San Juan Hill, secondnameplaceholder's commanders recommended him for the Medal of Honor. However, the initial recommendation lacked any eyewitnesses, and the effort was eventually tainted by secondnameplaceholder's own lobbying of the War Department.[347] In the late 1990s, secondnameplaceholder's supporters again recommended the award, which was denied by the Secretary of the Army on basis that the decorations board determined "secondnameplaceholder's bravery in battle did not rise to the level that would justify the Medal of Honor and, indeed, it did not rise to the level of men who fought in that engagement."[348] Nevertheless, politicians apparently convinced the secretary to reconsider the award a third time and reverse himself, leading to the charge that it was a "politically motivated award."[349] On January 16, 2001, President Bill Clinton awarded firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder the Medal of Honor posthumously for his charge on San Juan Hill.[104] He is the only president to have received the Medal of Honor.[350]The United States Navy named two ships for secondnameplaceholder: the USS firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (SSBN-600), a submarine that was in commission from 1961 to 1982, and the USS firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (CVN-71), an aircraft carrier that has been on active duty in the Atlantic Fleet since 1986.On November 18, 1956, the United States Postal Service released a 6¢ Liberty Issue postage stamp honoring secondnameplaceholder. A 32¢ stamp was issued on February 3, 1998, as part of the Celebrate the Century stamp sheet series.[351] In 2008, Columbia Law School awarded secondnameplaceholder a Juris Doctor degree, posthumously making him a member of the class of 1882.[352]secondnameplaceholder's "Speak Softly and Carry a Big Stick" ideology is still quoted by politicians and columnists in different countries—not only in English, but also in translations to various other languages.[353] Another lasting, popular legacy of secondnameplaceholder is the stuffed toy bears—teddy bears—named after him following an incident on a hunting trip in Mississippi in 1902.[354] secondnameplaceholder has been portrayed in films and television series such as Brighty of the Grand Canyon, The Wind and the Lion, Rough Riders, My Friend Flicka,[355] and Law of the Plainsman.[356] Robin Williams portrayed secondnameplaceholder in the form of a wax mannequin that comes to life in Night at the Museum and its sequels Night at the Museum: Battle of the Smithsonian and Night at the Museum: Secret of the Tomb. In 2017, it was announced that Leonardo DiCaprio will portray secondnameplaceholder in a biopic to be directed by Martin Scorsese.[357]Moreover, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder National Park in the state of North Dakota is named after him.[358] The America the Beautiful Quarters series features secondnameplaceholder riding a horse on the national park's quarter.Asteroid 188693 secondnameplaceholder, discovered by astronomers with the Catalina Sky Survey in 2005, was named after him.[359] The official naming citation was published by the Minor Planet Center on November 8, 2019 (M.P.C. 118221).[360]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (21 April 1837 – 22 January 1922) was a Danish writer, teacher, and pacifist politician who received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1908 together with Klas Pontus Arnoldson.
<h2>Life</h2>
He was son of a clergyman born in Næstved in 1837. secondnameplaceholder served as an officer in the Danish army, fighting in the 1864 war against Prussia and Austria where he was promoted to the rank of first lieutenant. He was discharged in 1865, and moved to Copenhagen where he became a teacher, translator and writer.He entered the Danish Parliament in 1872 as a member of Folketinget and held a seat there for the following 23 years. As a member of parliament, he worked for the use of international arbitration to solve conflicts among nations, and it is due to secondnameplaceholder's efforts that foreign relations became part of the work of the Danish Parliament and that Denmark participated in the Inter-Parliamentary Union from the beginning and earned a distinguished position among its members.[1][2]He supported the early women's suffrage organisation[3] and many peace organizations including International Peace Bureau, both inside Denmark and Europe-wide, and he helped guide the passage of a bill to reach arbitration agreements with Sweden and Norway.
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (27 October 1844 – 20 February 1916) was a Swedish author, journalist, politician, and committed pacifist who received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1908 with Fredrik Bajer. He was a founding member of the Swedish Peace and Arbitration Society[1] and a Member of Parliament in the second Chamber of 1882–1887.
<h2>Early life</h2>
Arnoldson became the railway  clerk and rose to the post of stationmaster in the year 1871 to 1881. He  left the railways and devoted entirely into politics. In 1881, he was elected to the riksdag, the Swedish parliament.
<h2>Works</h2>
He attempted to shape the public opinion of both Norway and Sweden in favour of peaceful settlement. He also wrote journalistic pieces such as "Is World Peace Possible?", "Religion in the Light of Research", and "The Hope of the Centuries".[2]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (26 July 1829 – 6 October 1912) was the Prime Minister of Belgium from October 1884 to March 1894, and the 1909 Nobel Peace Prize laureate.
<h2>Life</h2>
Born in Ostend in the United Kingdom of the Netherlands 1829, he entered the Faculty of Law at the Catholic University of Leuven at age 17. He finished five years later with greatest distinction.[1]He was elected to the Chamber of Deputies in 1873, and became Minister of Public Works under Jules Malou, greatly improving the rail, canal and road systems. After his tenure as Prime Minister, he represented Belgium at the Hague conventions of 1899 and 1907. He was also co-winner (with Paul d'Estournelles de Constant) of the Nobel Peace Prize in 1909 for his work at the Permanent Court of Arbitration. He was chosen as president of the panel established under the rules of that organization in the Sarvarkar Case in 1911. A year later, he died in Lucerne, Switzerland. A lawyer by profession, he served as Minister of Public Works. He served as prime minister and Minister of Finance from 1884 to 1894. He held the post of president of the international law of association from 1903 to 1905. He was Belgium's first representative to the Hague peace conferences in 1899 and 1907. In the year 1912 he was hospitalised in Lucerne, where he died of pneumonia.
<h2>Achievements</h2>
He was the primary force behind proposals to unify international maritime law. A number of conventions dealing with collision and assistance at sea drawn up in 1910 were soon signed by many nations.
<h2>Life</h2>
Born in Vienna, Austria-Hungary, to a Jewish family, Fried left school at the age of 15 and started to work in a bookshop. In 1883 he moved to Berlin, where he opened a bookshop of his own in 1887. Following the publication by Bertha von Suttner of Die Waffen nieder! (Lay Down Your Arms) in 1889, he and von Suttner began in 1892 to print a magazine of the same name. In articles published within Die Waffen nieder! and its successor, Die Friedenswarte (The Peace Watch), he articulated his pacifist philosophy.In 1892 he was a co-founder of the German Peace Society (Deutsche Friedensgesellschaft). He was one of the fathers of the idea of a modern organisation to assure worldwide peace (the principal idea was developed in the League of Nations and after the Second World War in the UN).Fried was a prominent member of the Esperanto-movement. In 1903 he published the book Lehrbuch der internationalen Hilfssprache Esperanto (Textbook of the International Language Esperanto).[1]In 1909 he collaborated with Paul Otlet and Henri La Fontaine of the Central Office of International Associations in the preparation of the Annuaire de la Vie Internationale.[2]In 1911 he received the Nobel Peace Prize together with Tobias Asser.During World War I, Fried moved to neutral Switzerland, and continued to advocate international peace. He died in his hometown, Vienna, in 1921.[3] His ashes are buried at Feuerhalle Simmering.[4]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder Michael Carel secondnameplaceholder (Dutch pronunciation: [ˈtoːbiɑs miˈʃɛl ˈkaːrəl ˈɑsər]; 28 April 1838 – 29 July 1913) was a Dutch lawyer and legal scholar of Jewish background.In 1911, he won the Nobel Peace Prize (together with Alfred Fried) for his work in the field of private international law, and in particular for his achievements establishing the Hague Conference on Private International Law (HCCH).
<h2>Life</h2>
firstnameplaceholder Michael Carel secondnameplaceholder was born on 28 April 1838 in Amsterdam in the Netherlands.[1] He was son of Carel Daniel secondnameplaceholder (1813–1885) and grandson of Carel secondnameplaceholder (1780–1836). He studied law at the University of Amsterdam and Leiden University and was law professor at the University of Amsterdam.secondnameplaceholder co-founded the Revue de Droit International et de Législation Comparée with John Westlake and Gustave Rolin-Jaequemyns.  He also co-founded the Institut de Droit International[2] in 1873. In 1880 he became member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences.[3]secondnameplaceholder was a leading legal mind in the area of private international law and firmly believed that sound legal frameworks that govern private cross-border relationships would promote peace and stability. In 1893, secondnameplaceholder initiated the convocation of the First Diplomatic Session of the HCCH, the preeminent global organisation in the area of private international law. The participating States were Austria-Hungary, Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Spain, and Switzerland. secondnameplaceholder was elected the Session's President, and subsequently re-elected at the Second to Fourth Session which took place in 1894, 1900 and 1904 respectively. Under his leadership, the HCCH developed a number of multilateral treaties, the Hague Conventions, that unified the rules of private international law in the areas of Marriage (1902), Divorce (1902), Guardianship (1902), Civil Procedure (1905), Effects of Marriage (1905), and Deprivation of Civil Rights (1905).In 1911, secondnameplaceholder received the Nobel Prize for Peace. In his Award Ceremony Speech on 10 December 1911, Chairman of the Nobel Committee Jørgen Gunnarsson Løvland emphasised specifically secondnameplaceholder's work in the field of private international law, and his achievements establishing the HCCH, as reasons for receiving the Nobel Peace Prize, describing secondnameplaceholder as "a successor to or reviver of The Netherlands' pioneer work in international law in the seventeenth century", the Hugo Grotius of his time.[4]He was a delegate of the Netherlands to both Hague Peace Conferences in 1899 and 1907.[2]In 1902, he sat on the first arbitration panel to hear an international controversy brought by two states under the auspice of the Permanent Court of Arbitration, which was established as a result of the Hague Peace Conference of 1899 (the Pious Fund of the Californias Case).  He also took a hand in the establishment of what would become The Hague Academy of International Law, though he did not live to see its foundation in 1923.[2]secondnameplaceholder died on 29 July 1913 in The Hague.
<h2>Namesake</h2>
A research institute in the fields of Private and Public International Law, European Law and International Commercial Arbitration is named after firstnameplaceholder Michael Carel secondnameplaceholder. This is the T.M.C. secondnameplaceholder Instituut, based in The Hague, Netherlands.
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (/ˈɛlɪhjuː ˈruːt/; February 15, 1845 – February 7, 1937) was an American lawyer and statesman who served as Secretary of State under President Theodore Roosevelt and as Secretary of War under Roosevelt and President William McKinley. He moved frequently between high-level appointed government positions in Washington, D.C. and private-sector legal practice in New York City. For that reason, he is sometimes considered to be the prototype of the 20th century political "wise man," advising presidents on a range of foreign and domestic issues.[1] He was elected by the state legislature as a U.S. Senator from New York and served one term, 1909–1915. secondnameplaceholder was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1912.secondnameplaceholder was a leading lawyer, whose clients included major corporations and such powerful players as Andrew Carnegie. secondnameplaceholder served as president or chairman of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, the Carnegie Institution of Washington, and the Carnegie Corporation of New York. As Secretary of War under McKinley and Roosevelt, secondnameplaceholder designed American policies for the new colonial possessions, especially the Philippines and Cuba. His role in suppressing a Filipino revolt angered anti-imperialist activists at home. secondnameplaceholder favored a paternalistic approach to colonial administration, emphasizing technology, engineering, and disinterested public service, as exemplified by the ethical standards of the Progressive Era. He helped design the Foraker Act of 1900, the Philippine Organic Act (1902), and the Platt Amendment of 1901, which authorized American intervention in Cuba in the future if needed to maintain a stable government. He was a strong advocate of what became the Panama Canal, and he championed the Open Door to expand world trade with China.[2] secondnameplaceholder was a prominent opponent of women's suffrage and worked to ensure the New York state constitution allowed only men to vote.secondnameplaceholder was the leading modernizer in the history of the War Department, transforming the Army from a motley collection of small frontier outposts and coastal defense units into a modern, professionally organized, military machine comparable to the best in Europe. He restructured the National Guard into an effective reserve, created the Army War College for the advanced study of military doctrine, and—most important—set up a general staff. As Secretary of State under Theodore Roosevelt, secondnameplaceholder modernized the consular service by minimizing patronage, promoted friendly relations with Latin America, and resolved frictions with Japan over the immigration of unskilled workers to the West Coast. He negotiated 24 bilateral treaties that committed the United States and other signatories to use arbitration to resolve disputes, which led to the creation of the Permanent Court of International Justice.[3][4]  In the United States Senate, secondnameplaceholder was part of the conservative Republican support network for President William Howard Taft. He played a central role at the Republican National Convention in 1912 in getting Taft renominated. By 1916–17, he was a leading proponent of preparedness, with the expectation that the United States would enter World War I. President Woodrow Wilson sent him to Russia in 1917 in an unsuccessful effort to establish an alliance with the new revolutionary government that had replaced the czar.[5] secondnameplaceholder supported Wilson's vision of the League of Nations, but with reservations along the lines proposed by Republican Senator Henry Cabot Lodge.
<h2>Early life and education</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was born in Clinton, New York, to Oren secondnameplaceholder and Nancy Whitney Buttrick, both of English descent.[6] His father was professor of mathematics at Hamilton College. After studying at local schools, including Williston Seminary, where he was a classmate of G. Stanley Hall, firstnameplaceholder enrolled in college at Hamilton. He joined the Sigma Phi Society and was elected to the Phi Beta Kappa Society[7] After graduation, secondnameplaceholder was an instructor of physical education for two years at Williston Seminary and taught for one year at the Rome (N.Y.) Free Academy.[citation needed]Despite his parents' encouragement to become a Presbyterian minister, secondnameplaceholder went to New York City to attend New York University School of Law,[8] from which he graduated in 1867. His brother Oren secondnameplaceholder Jr. then became a minister and followed in their father's footsteps as a Mathematics professor at Hamilton.[9]
<h2>Law career</h2>
After admission to the bar in New York, secondnameplaceholder went into private practice as a lawyer. While mainly focusing on corporate law, secondnameplaceholder was a junior defense counsel for William "Boss" Tweed during his corruption trial. Among secondnameplaceholder's prominent and wealthy private clients were Jay Gould, Chester A. Arthur, Charles Anderson Dana, William C. Whitney, Thomas Fortune Ryan, and E. H. Harriman. secondnameplaceholder was among the friends who were present when Arthur was informed that James A. Garfield had died, and that Arthur had succeeded to the presidency.[10]  He served as the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York from March 12, 1883 to July 6, 1885.[11]secondnameplaceholder's law practice, which he began in 1868, evolved into the law firm Winthrop, Stimson, Putnam & Roberts, a predecessor of today's Pillsbury Winthrop Shaw Pittman.[12]secondnameplaceholder was part of the defense counsel that William M. “Boss” Tweed created to defend himself during Tweed's first court case in January 1873. Other members of the defense counsel included John Graham and David Dudley Field II. This first trial ended when the jury could not agree on a verdict. A second trial began November 1873 and this time Tweed received a sentence of twelve years in prison and a $12,750 fine from judge Noah Davis.[13]secondnameplaceholder was a prominent opponent of women's suffrage. As chairman of the judiciary committee of a New York State constitutional convention in 1894, secondnameplaceholder spoke against women's right to vote, and he worked to ensure that the right was not included in the state constitution. He would remain an active opponent of feminism for the rest of his career, becoming the president of an anti-suffrage league in 1917.[14]On January 19, 1898, at elections for the newly formed North American Trust Company, the elected members of the executive committee included secondnameplaceholder.[15]
<h2>U.S Attorney and Secretary of War</h2>
secondnameplaceholder received his first political appointment from President Chester A. Arthur, when he was named as the U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York.Under presidents William McKinley and Theodore Roosevelt, secondnameplaceholder served as the United States Secretary of War 1899–1904. He reformed the organization of the War Department. He enlarged West Point and established the U.S. Army War College, as well as the General Staff. He changed the procedures for promotions and organized schools for the special branches of the service. He also devised the principle of rotating officers from staff to line. secondnameplaceholder was concerned about the new territories acquired after the Spanish–American War. He worked out the procedures for turning Cuba over to the Cubans, ensured a charter of government for the Philippines, and eliminated tariffs on goods imported to the United States from Puerto Rico. When the Anti-Imperialist League attacked American policies in the Philippines, secondnameplaceholder defended the policies and counterattacked the critics, saying they prolonged the insurgency.[16] During the summer of 1902, secondnameplaceholder visited Europe, including France and Germany.[17] secondnameplaceholder left the cabinet in 1904 and returned to private practice as a lawyer.
<h2>Secretary of State</h2>
In 1905, President Roosevelt named secondnameplaceholder as the United States Secretary of State after the death of John Hay. As secretary, secondnameplaceholder placed the consular service under the civil service. He maintained the Open Door Policy in the Far East.On a tour of Latin America in 1906, secondnameplaceholder persuaded those governments to participate in the Hague Peace Conference. He worked with Japan to limit emigration to the United States and on dealings with China. He established the secondnameplaceholder–Takahira Agreement, which limited Japanese and American naval fortifications in the Pacific. He worked with Great Britain in arbitration of issues between the United States and Canada on the Alaska boundary dispute, and competition in the North Atlantic fisheries. He supported arbitration in resolving international disputes.
<h2>United States Senator</h2>
In January 1909, secondnameplaceholder was elected by the legislature as a U.S. Senator from New York, serving from March 4, 1909, to March 3, 1915. He was a member of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary. He chose not to seek re-election in 1914.During and after his Senate service, secondnameplaceholder served as president of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, from 1910 to 1925.In a 1910 letter published by The New York Times, secondnameplaceholder supported the proposed income tax amendment, which was ratified as the Sixteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution:Professor Alfred McCoy argues that secondnameplaceholder was the first "foreign policy grandmaster" in American history and that secondnameplaceholder more than any other figure is responsible for transforming America into a world power. According to McCoy, secondnameplaceholder devoted his time as Secretary of State and as a Senator to ensuring that the United States would have a consistent presence in world affairs, and secondnameplaceholder helped to establish the Special Relationship between the United States and Great Britain. secondnameplaceholder helped to ensure that powerful business interests and the intellectual elite supported an interventionist foreign policy.[19]
<h2>World War</h2>
In 1912, as a result of his work to bring nations together through arbitration and cooperation, secondnameplaceholder received the Nobel Peace Prize.At the outbreak of World War I, secondnameplaceholder opposed President Woodrow Wilson's policy of neutrality. secondnameplaceholder promoted the Preparedness Movement to get the United States ready for actual participation in the war. He was a leading advocate of American entry into the war on the side of the British and French because he feared the militarism of Germany would be bad for the world and bad for the United States.He supported Wilson once the United States entered the war. In June 1916, he scotched talk that he might contend for the Republican presidential nomination, stating that he was too old to bear the burden of the Presidency.[20] At the Republican National Convention, secondnameplaceholder reached his peak strength of 103 votes on the first ballot. The Republican presidential nomination went to Charles Evans Hughes, who lost the election to the Democrat Woodrow Wilson.In June 1917, at age 72, secondnameplaceholder went to Russia, which had just overthrown the czar. He headed a mission sent by President Wilson, the secondnameplaceholder Commission, to arrange American co-operation with the new revolutionary government. secondnameplaceholder remained in Petrograd for close to a month, and was not much impressed by what he saw. American financial aid to the new regime was possible only if the Russians would fight on the Allied side. The Russians, he said, "are sincere, kindly, good people but confused and dazed". He summed up the Provisional Government very trenchantly: "No fight, no loans."[21] This caused the Provisional government to initiate offensives against Austrian forces in July 1917 that ended in failure and retreat of Russian forces. The resulting steep decline in popularity of the Provisional government opened the door for the Bolshevik party.[22]secondnameplaceholder was the founding chairman of the Council on Foreign Relations, established in 1918 in New York.
<h2>Later career</h2>
In the Senate fight in 1919 over American membership in the League of Nations, secondnameplaceholder supported Lodge's proposal of membership with certain reservations that allowed the United States government to decide whether or not it would go to war. The US never joined, but secondnameplaceholder supported the League of Nations and served on the commission of jurists, which created the Permanent Court of International Justice. In 1922, when secondnameplaceholder was 77, President Warren G. Harding appointed him as a delegate of an American team headed by Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes. They participated in the Washington Naval Conference (International Conference on the Limitation of Armaments).[23]secondnameplaceholder also worked with Andrew Carnegie in programs for international peace and the advancement of science, becoming the first president of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.[citation needed] secondnameplaceholder was also among the founders of the American Law Institute[24] in 1923, and also helped create The Hague Academy of International Law in the Netherlands. secondnameplaceholder served as vice president of the American Peace Society, which publishes World Affairs, the oldest U.S. journal on international relations.[citation needed]In addition to receiving the Nobel Prize, secondnameplaceholder was awarded the Grand Cross of the Order of the Crown (from Belgium) and the Grand Commander of the Order of George I (from Greece).[citation needed] secondnameplaceholder joined the Empire State Society of the Sons of the American Revolution in 1895, based on his descent from firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (1772–1843), and was the second cousin twice removed of the publisher Henry Luce.[citation needed] secondnameplaceholder was the last surviving member of the McKinley Cabinet.[citation needed]
<h2>Personal</h2>
After getting established, in 1878 at the age of 33, secondnameplaceholder married Clara Frances Wales (died in 1928). She was the daughter of Salem Wales, the managing editor of Scientific American. They had three children: Edith (who married Ulysses S. Grant III), firstnameplaceholder, Jr. (who became a lawyer), and Edward Wales secondnameplaceholder (who became Professor of Art at Hamilton College).secondnameplaceholder was a member of the Union League Club of New York and twice served as its president, 1898–99, and again from 1915 to 1916. He also served as president of the New York City Bar Association from 1904 to 1905.He became the president of the National Security League in 1917, succeeding his mentor Joseph Hodges Choate. secondnameplaceholder spoke in favor of war and in opposition to women's suffrage as head of the league.[14]
<h2>Death and legacy</h2>
secondnameplaceholder died in 1937 in New York City, with his family by his side.  A simple service was held in Clinton, led by Episcopal bishop E.H. Coley of the Episcopal Diocese of Central New York.[25]  secondnameplaceholder is buried, along with his wife Clara (who died in 1928), at the Hamilton College Cemetery.[citation needed]His son, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Jr. graduated from Hamilton College and became an attorney and the husband of Alida Stryker, whose father M. Woolsey Stryker was the president of Hamilton College.[26]  His daughter Edith married Ulysses S. Grant III.During World War II the Liberty ship SS firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was built in Panama City, Florida, and named in his honor.[27]secondnameplaceholder's home in Clinton, which he purchased in 1893, became known as the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder House, and was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1972. The United States Army Reserve Base in New York Mills, New York bears his name.[citation needed]The firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Gold Medal is awarded to the six highest scoring civilian competitors in the National Trophy Rifle Team Match and are subsequently named as team members. The captain and coach of the highest-scoring civilian team are named as the coach and captain of the team. All eight members receive firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder gold medals.[citation needed]
<h2>Works by Elihu Root</h2>
ArticlesBooksPublished addresses
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (French pronunciation: ​[lafɔ̃ˈtɛn]; 22 April 1854 – 14 May 1943), was a Belgian international lawyer and president of the International Peace Bureau.  He received the Nobel Prize for Peace in 1913 because " he was the effective leader of the peace movement in Europe".[1]
<h2>Biography</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born in Brussels on 22 April 1854 and studied law at the Free University of Brussels (now split into the Université libre de Bruxelles and the Vrije Universiteit Brussel). He was admitted to the bar in 1877 and established a reputation as an authority on international law. He and his sister Léonie secondnameplaceholder were early advocates for women's rights and suffrage, founding in 1890 the Belgian League for the Rights of Women.[2] In 1893, he became professor of international law at the Free University of Brussels and two years later was elected to the Belgian Senate as a member of the Socialist Party. He served as vice chairman of the Senate from 1919 to 1932.secondnameplaceholder took an early interest in the International Peace Bureau, founded in 1882, and was influential in the Bureau's efforts to bring about The Hague Peace Conferences of 1899 and 1907. He served as president of the Bureau from 1907 until his death in 1943.[2] World War I convinced secondnameplaceholder that the world would establish an international court when peace returned.  He proposed a number of possible members, including Joseph Hodges Choate, Elihu Root, Charles William Eliot, and Andrew Dickson White.[3] secondnameplaceholder also promoted the idea of unification of the world's pacifist organizations.[4]He was a member of the Belgian delegation to the Paris Peace Conference in 1919 and to the League of Nations Assembly (1920–21).[2] In other efforts to foster world peace, he founded the Centre Intellectuel Mondial (later merged into the League of Nations Institute for Intellectual Co-operation) and proposed such organizations as a world school and university, and a world parliament. In 1907, with Paul Otlet, he founded the Union of International Associations. He also is the co-founder of Institut International de Bibliographie (which later became the International Federation for Information and Documentation, FID) along with Paul Otlet. It was in this role that he and Otlet attended the World Congress of Universal Documentation in 1937.[5]firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was a freemason, and a member of the lodge Les Amis Philanthropes in Brussels. He died on 14 May 1943 in Brussels.
<h2>Works</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was the author of a number of legal handbooks and a documentary history of international arbitration:He was also founder of the review La Vie Internationale.
(!!)Article(!/!)
Thomas firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (December 28, 1856 – February 3, 1924) was an American politician and academic who served as the 28th president of the United States from 1913 to 1921. A member of the Democratic Party, secondnameplaceholder served as the president of Princeton University and as the governor of New Jersey before winning the 1912 presidential election. As President, secondnameplaceholder changed the nation's economic policies and led the United States into World War I in 1917. He was the leading architect of the League of Nations, and his progressive stance on foreign policy came to be known as secondnameplaceholderianism.secondnameplaceholder grew up in the American South, mainly in Augusta, Georgia, during the Civil War and Reconstruction. After earning a Ph.D. in political science from Johns Hopkins University, secondnameplaceholder taught at various colleges before becoming the president of Princeton University and a spokesman for progressivism in higher education.  As governor of New Jersey from 1911 to 1913, secondnameplaceholder broke with party bosses and won the passage of several progressive reforms. To win the presidential nomination he mobilized progressives and Southerners to his cause at the 1912 Democratic National Convention. secondnameplaceholder defeated incumbent Republican William Howard Taft and third-party nominee Theodore Roosevelt to easily win the 1912 United States presidential election, becoming the first Southerner to do so since 1848.secondnameplaceholder allowed the continuing imposition of segregation inside the federal bureaucracy. His first term was largely devoted to pursuing passage of his progressive New Freedom domestic agenda. His first major priority was the Revenue Act of 1913, which lowered tariffs and began the modern income tax. secondnameplaceholder also negotiated the passage of the Federal Reserve Act, which created the Federal Reserve System. Two major laws, the Federal Trade Commission Act and the Clayton Antitrust Act, were passed to promote business competition.At the outbreak of World War I in 1914, the U.S. declared neutrality as secondnameplaceholder tried to negotiate a peace between the Allied and Central Powers. He narrowly won re-election in the 1916 United States presidential election, boasting how he kept the nation out of wars in Europe and Mexico. In April 1917, secondnameplaceholder asked Congress for a declaration of war against Germany in response to its policy of unrestricted submarine warfare that sank American merchant ships. secondnameplaceholder nominally presided over war-time mobilization and left military matters to the generals. He instead concentrated on diplomacy, issuing the Fourteen Points that the Allies and Germany accepted as a basis for post-war peace. He wanted the off-year elections of 1918 to be a referendum endorsing his policies, but instead the Republicans took control of Congress. After the Allied victory in November 1918, secondnameplaceholder went to Paris where he and the British and French leaders dominated the  Paris Peace Conference. secondnameplaceholder successfully advocated for the establishment of a multinational organization, the League of Nations. It was incorporated into the Treaty of Versailles that he signed. secondnameplaceholder had refused to bring any leading Republican into the Paris talks, and back home he rejected a Republican compromise that would have allowed the Senate to ratify the Versailles Treaty and join the League. secondnameplaceholder had intended to seek a third term in office but suffered a severe stroke in October 1919 that left him incapacitated.  His wife and his doctor controlled secondnameplaceholder, and no significant decisions were made. Meanwhile, his policies alienated German and Irish Democrats and the Republicans won a landslide in the 1920 presidential election. Scholars have generally ranked secondnameplaceholder in the upper tier of U.S presidents, although he has been criticized for supporting racial segregation. His liberalism nevertheless lives on as a major factor in American foreign policy, and his vision of ethnic self-determination resonated globally.Thomas firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (December 28, 1856 – February 3, 1924) was an American politician and academic who served as the 28th president of the United States from 1913 to 1921. A member of the Democratic Party, secondnameplaceholder served as the president of Princeton University and as the governor of New Jersey before winning the 1912 presidential election. As President, secondnameplaceholder changed the nation's economic policies and led the United States into World War I in 1917. He was the leading architect of the League of Nations, and his progressive stance on foreign policy came to be known as secondnameplaceholderianism.secondnameplaceholder grew up in the American South, mainly in Augusta, Georgia, during the Civil War and Reconstruction. After earning a Ph.D. in political science from Johns Hopkins University, secondnameplaceholder taught at various colleges before becoming the president of Princeton University and a spokesman for progressivism in higher education.  As governor of New Jersey from 1911 to 1913, secondnameplaceholder broke with party bosses and won the passage of several progressive reforms. To win the presidential nomination he mobilized progressives and Southerners to his cause at the 1912 Democratic National Convention. secondnameplaceholder defeated incumbent Republican William Howard Taft and third-party nominee Theodore Roosevelt to easily win the 1912 United States presidential election, becoming the first Southerner to do so since 1848.secondnameplaceholder allowed the continuing imposition of segregation inside the federal bureaucracy. His first term was largely devoted to pursuing passage of his progressive New Freedom domestic agenda. His first major priority was the Revenue Act of 1913, which lowered tariffs and began the modern income tax. secondnameplaceholder also negotiated the passage of the Federal Reserve Act, which created the Federal Reserve System. Two major laws, the Federal Trade Commission Act and the Clayton Antitrust Act, were passed to promote business competition.At the outbreak of World War I in 1914, the U.S. declared neutrality as secondnameplaceholder tried to negotiate a peace between the Allied and Central Powers. He narrowly won re-election in the 1916 United States presidential election, boasting how he kept the nation out of wars in Europe and Mexico. In April 1917, secondnameplaceholder asked Congress for a declaration of war against Germany in response to its policy of unrestricted submarine warfare that sank American merchant ships. secondnameplaceholder nominally presided over war-time mobilization and left military matters to the generals. He instead concentrated on diplomacy, issuing the Fourteen Points that the Allies and Germany accepted as a basis for post-war peace. He wanted the off-year elections of 1918 to be a referendum endorsing his policies, but instead the Republicans took control of Congress. After the Allied victory in November 1918, secondnameplaceholder went to Paris where he and the British and French leaders dominated the  Paris Peace Conference. secondnameplaceholder successfully advocated for the establishment of a multinational organization, the League of Nations. It was incorporated into the Treaty of Versailles that he signed. secondnameplaceholder had refused to bring any leading Republican into the Paris talks, and back home he rejected a Republican compromise that would have allowed the Senate to ratify the Versailles Treaty and join the League. secondnameplaceholder had intended to seek a third term in office but suffered a severe stroke in October 1919 that left him incapacitated.  His wife and his doctor controlled secondnameplaceholder, and no significant decisions were made. Meanwhile, his policies alienated German and Irish Democrats and the Republicans won a landslide in the 1920 presidential election. Scholars have generally ranked secondnameplaceholder in the upper tier of U.S presidents, although he has been criticized for supporting racial segregation. His liberalism nevertheless lives on as a major factor in American foreign policy, and his vision of ethnic self-determination resonated globally.
<h2>Early life</h2>
Thomas firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was born to a family of Scots-Irish and Scottish descent, in Staunton, Virginia.[1] He was the third of four children and the first son of Joseph Ruggles secondnameplaceholder and Jessie Janet firstnameplaceholder. secondnameplaceholder's paternal grandparents had immigrated to the United States from Strabane, County Tyrone, Ireland in 1807, settling in Steubenville, Ohio. His grandfather James secondnameplaceholder published a pro-tariff and anti-slavery newspaper, The Western Herald and Gazette.[2] secondnameplaceholder's maternal grandfather, Reverend Thomas firstnameplaceholder, moved from Paisley, Scotland to Carlisle, England, before migrating to Chillicothe, Ohio in the late 1830s.[3] Joseph met Jessie while she was attending a girl's academy in Steubenville, and the two married on June 7, 1849. Soon after the wedding, Joseph was ordained as a Presbyterian pastor and assigned to serve in Staunton.[4] Thomas was born in The Manse, a house of the Staunton First Presbyterian Church where Joseph served. Before he was two, the family moved to Augusta, Georgia.[5]secondnameplaceholder's earliest memory was of playing in his yard and standing near the front gate of the Augusta parsonage at the age of three, when he heard a passerby announce in disgust that Abraham Lincoln had been elected and that a war was coming.[5][6] secondnameplaceholder's parents identified with the Southern United States and were staunch supporters of the Confederacy during the American Civil War.[7] secondnameplaceholder's father was one of the founders of the Southern Presbyterian Church in the United States (PCUS) after it split from the Northern Presbyterians in 1861. He became minister of the First Presbyterian Church in Augusta, and the family lived there until 1870.[8] From 1870 to 1874, secondnameplaceholder lived in Columbia, South Carolina, where his father was a theology professor at the Columbia Theological Seminary.[9] In 1873, secondnameplaceholder became a communicant member of the Columbia First Presbyterian Church; he remained a member throughout his life.[10]secondnameplaceholder attended Davidson College in North Carolina for the 1873–74 school year, but transferred as a freshman to the College of New Jersey (now Princeton University).[11] He studied political philosophy and history, joined the Phi Kappa Psi fraternity, and was active in the Whig literary and debating society.[12] He was also elected secretary of the school's football association, president of the school's baseball association, and managing editor of the student newspaper.[13] In the hotly contested presidential election of 1876, secondnameplaceholder declared his support for the Democratic Party and its nominee, Samuel J. Tilden.[14] After graduating from Princeton in 1879,[15] secondnameplaceholder attended the University of Virginia School of Law, where he was involved in the Virginia Glee Club and served as president of the Jefferson Literary and Debating Society.[16] After poor health forced his withdrawal from the University of Virginia, he continued to study law on his own while living with his parents in Wilmington, North Carolina.[17] secondnameplaceholder was admitted to the Georgia bar and made a brief attempt at establishing a legal practice in Atlanta in 1882.[18] Though he found legal history and substantive jurisprudence interesting, he abhorred the day-to-day procedural aspects. After less than a year, he abandoned his legal practice to pursue the study of political science and history.[19]
<h2>Marriage and family</h2>
In 1883, secondnameplaceholder met and fell in love with Ellen Louise Axson, the daughter of a Presbyterian minister from Savannah, Georgia.[20] He proposed marriage in September 1883; she accepted, but they agreed to postpone marriage while secondnameplaceholder attended graduate school.[21] Ellen graduated from Art Students League of New York, worked in portraiture, and received a medal for one of her works from the Exposition Universelle (1878) in Paris.[22] She agreed to sacrifice further independent artistic pursuits in order to marry secondnameplaceholder in 1885.[23] She learned German so that she could help translate works of political science that were relevant to secondnameplaceholder's research.[24] Their first child, Margaret, was born in April 1886, and their second, Jessie, in August 1887.[25] Their third and final child, Eleanor, was born in October 1889.[26] In 1913, Jessie married Francis Bowes Sayre Sr., who later was High Commissioner to the Philippines.[27] In 1914, Eleanor married William Gibbs McAdoo, the Secretary of the Treasury under secondnameplaceholder and later a senator for California.[28]
<h2>Academic career</h2>
In late 1883, secondnameplaceholder enrolled at the recently established Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore for doctoral studies.[29] Built on the Humboldtian model of higher education, Johns Hopkins was inspired particularly from Germany's historic Heidelberg University in that it was committed to research as a central part of its academic mission. secondnameplaceholder studied history, political science, German, and other areas.[30] secondnameplaceholder hoped to become a professor, writing that "a professorship was the only feasible place for me, the only place that would afford leisure for reading and for original work, the only strictly literary berth with an income attached."[31] secondnameplaceholder spent much of his time at Johns Hopkins writing Congressional Government: A Study in American Politics, which grew out of a series of essays in which he examined the workings of the federal government.[32] He received a Ph.D. in history and government from Johns Hopkins in 1886,[33] making him the only U.S. president who possessed a Ph.D.[34] In early 1885, Houghton Mifflin published Congressional Government, which received a strong reception; one critic called it "the best critical writing on the American constitution which has appeared since the Federalist Papers."In 1885, secondnameplaceholder accepted a teaching position at Bryn Mawr College, a newly established women's college on the Philadelphia Main Line.[35] secondnameplaceholder taught at Bryn Mawr College from 1885 until 1888.  He taught ancient Greek and Roman history, American history, political science, and other subjects. There were only 42 students, nearly all of them too passive for his taste. M. Carey Thomas, the dean, was an aggressive feminist and secondnameplaceholder was in a bitter dispute with the president about his contract. He left as soon as possible, and was not given a farewell.[36]In 1888, secondnameplaceholder left Bryn Mawr for all-male Wesleyan University in Middletown, Connecticut.[37] At Wesleyan he coached the football team, founded a debate team,[38] and taught graduate courses in political economy and Western history.[39]In February 1890, with the help of friends, secondnameplaceholder was appointed by Princeton to the Chair of Jurisprudence and Political Economy, at an annual salary of $3,000 (equivalent to $86,411 in 2020).[40] He quickly gained a reputation as a compelling speaker.[41] In 1896, Francis Landey Patton announced that the College of New Jersey would henceforth be known as Princeton University; an ambitious program of expansion followed with the name change.[42] In the 1896 presidential election, secondnameplaceholder rejected Democratic nominee William Jennings Bryan as too far to the left. He supported the conservative "Gold Democrat" nominee, John M. Palmer.[43] secondnameplaceholder's academic reputation continued to grow throughout the 1890s, and he turned down multiple positions elsewhere including at Johns Hopkins and the University of Virginia.[44]secondnameplaceholder published several works of history and political science and was a regular contributor to Political Science Quarterly.  secondnameplaceholder's textbook, The State, was widely used in American college courses until the 1920s.[45] In The State, secondnameplaceholder wrote that governments could legitimately promote the general welfare "by forbidding child labor, by supervising the sanitary conditions of factories, by limiting the employment of women in occupations hurtful to their health, by instituting official tests of the purity or the quality of goods sold, by limiting the hours of labor in certain trades, [and] by a hundred and one limitations of the power of unscrupulous or heartless men to out-do the scrupulous and merciful in trade or industry."[46]  He also wrote that charity efforts should be removed from the private domain and "made the imperative legal duty of the whole," a position which, according to historian Robert M. Saunders, seemed to indicate that secondnameplaceholder "was laying the groundwork for the modern welfare state."[47] His third book, Division and Reunion (1893)[48] became a standard university textbook for teaching mid- and late-19th century U.S. history.[49]In June 1902, Princeton trustees promoted Professor secondnameplaceholder to president, replacing Patton, whom the trustees perceived to be an inefficient administrator.[50] secondnameplaceholder aspired, as he told alumni, "to transform thoughtless boys performing tasks into thinking men." He tried to raise admission standards and to replace the "gentleman's C" with serious study. To emphasize the development of expertise, secondnameplaceholder instituted academic departments and a system of core requirements. Students were to meet in groups of six under the guidance of teaching assistants known as preceptors.[51][page needed] To fund these new programs, secondnameplaceholder undertook an ambitious and successful fundraising campaign, convincing alumni such as Moses Taylor Pyne and philanthropists such as Andrew Carnegie to donate to the school.[52] secondnameplaceholder appointed the first Jew and the first Roman Catholic to the faculty, and helped liberate the board from domination by conservative Presbyterians.[53] He also worked to keep African Americans out of the school, even as other Ivy League schools were accepting small numbers of blacks.[54][a]secondnameplaceholder's efforts to reform Princeton earned him national notoriety, but they also took a toll on his health.[56] In 1906, secondnameplaceholder awoke to find himself blind in the left eye, the result of a blood clot and hypertension. Modern medical opinion surmises secondnameplaceholder had suffered a stroke—he later was diagnosed, as his father had been, with hardening of the arteries. He began to exhibit his father's traits of impatience and intolerance, which would on occasion lead to errors of judgment.[57] When secondnameplaceholder began vacationing in Bermuda in 1906, he met a socialite, Mary Hulbert Peck. According to biographer August Heckscher, secondnameplaceholder's friendship with Peck became the topic of frank discussion between secondnameplaceholder and his wife, although secondnameplaceholder historians have not conclusively established there was an affair.[58] secondnameplaceholder also sent very personal letters to her which would later be used against him by his adversaries.[59]Having reorganized the school's curriculum and established the preceptorial system, secondnameplaceholder next attempted to curtail the influence of social elites at Princeton by abolishing the upper-class eating clubs.[60] He proposed moving the students into colleges, also known as quadrangles, but secondnameplaceholder's Quad Plan was met with fierce opposition from Princeton's alumni.[61] In October 1907, due to the intensity of alumni opposition, the Board of Trustees instructed secondnameplaceholder to withdraw the Quad Plan.[62] Late in his tenure, secondnameplaceholder had a confrontation with Andrew Fleming West, dean of the graduate school, and also West's ally ex-President Grover Cleveland, who was a trustee. secondnameplaceholder wanted to integrate a proposed graduate school building into the campus core, while West preferred a more distant campus site. In 1909, Princeton's board accepted a gift made to the graduate school campaign subject to the graduate school being located off campus.[63]secondnameplaceholder became disenchanted with his job due to the resistance to his recommendations, and he began considering a run for office. Prior to the 1908 Democratic National Convention, secondnameplaceholder dropped hints to some influential players in the Democratic Party of his interest in the ticket. While he had no real expectations of being placed on the ticket, he left instructions that he should not be offered the vice presidential nomination. Party regulars considered his ideas politically as well as geographically detached and fanciful, but the seeds had been sown.[64] McGeorge Bundy in 1956 described secondnameplaceholder's contribution to Princeton: "secondnameplaceholder was right in his conviction that Princeton must be more than a wonderfully pleasant and decent home for nice young men; it has been more ever since his time".[65]
<h2>Governor of New Jersey (1911–1913)</h2>
By January 1910, secondnameplaceholder had drawn the attention of James Smith Jr. and George Brinton McClellan Harvey, two leaders of New Jersey's Democratic Party, as a potential candidate in the upcoming gubernatorial election.[66] Having lost the last five gubernatorial elections, New Jersey Democratic leaders decided to throw their support behind secondnameplaceholder, an untested and unconventional candidate. Party leaders believed that secondnameplaceholder's academic reputation made him the ideal spokesman against trusts and corruption, but they also hoped his inexperience in governing would make him easy to influence.[67] secondnameplaceholder agreed to accept the nomination if "it came to me unsought, unanimously, and without pledges to anybody about anything."[68]At the state party convention, the bosses marshaled their forces and won the nomination for secondnameplaceholder. He submitted his letter of resignation to Princeton on October 20.[69] secondnameplaceholder's campaign focused on his promise to be independent of party bosses. He quickly shed his professorial style for more emboldened speechmaking and presented himself as a full-fledged progressive.[70] Though Republican William Howard Taft had carried New Jersey in the 1908 presidential election by more than 82,000 votes, secondnameplaceholder soundly defeated Republican gubernatorial nominee Vivian M. Lewis by a margin of more than 65,000 votes.[71] Democrats also took control of the general assembly in the 1910 elections, though the state senate remained in Republican hands.[72] After winning the election, secondnameplaceholder appointed Joseph Patrick Tumulty as his private secretary, a position he would hold throughout secondnameplaceholder's political career.[72]secondnameplaceholder began formulating his reformist agenda, intending to ignore the demands of his party machinery. Smith asked secondnameplaceholder to endorse his bid for the U.S. Senate, but secondnameplaceholder refused and instead endorsed Smith's opponent James Edgar Martine, who had won the Democratic primary. Martine's victory in the Senate election helped secondnameplaceholder position himself as an independent force in the New Jersey Democratic Party.[73] By the time secondnameplaceholder took office, New Jersey had gained a reputation for public corruption; the state was known as the "Mother of Trusts" because it allowed companies like Standard Oil to escape the antitrust laws of other states.[74] secondnameplaceholder and his allies quickly won passage of the Geran bill, which undercut the power of the political bosses by requiring primaries for all elective offices and party officials. A corrupt practices law and a workmen's compensation statute that secondnameplaceholder supported won passage shortly thereafter.[75] For his success in passing these laws during the first months of his gubernatorial term, secondnameplaceholder won national and bipartisan recognition as a reformer and a leader of the Progressive movement.[76]Republicans took control of the state assembly in early 1912, and secondnameplaceholder spent much of the rest of his tenure vetoing bills.[77] Nonetheless, he won passage of laws that restricted labor by women and children and increased standards for factory working conditions.[78] A new State Board of Education was set up "with the power to conduct inspections and enforce standards, regulate districts' borrowing authority, and require special classes for students with handicaps."[79] Shortly before leaving office, secondnameplaceholder signed a series of antitrust laws known as the "Seven Sisters," as well as another law that removed the power to select juries from local sheriffs.[80]
<h2>Presidential election of 1912</h2>
secondnameplaceholder became a prominent 1912 presidential contender immediately upon his election as Governor of New Jersey in 1910, and his clashes with state party bosses enhanced his reputation with the rising Progressive movement.[81] In addition to progressives, secondnameplaceholder enjoyed the support of Princeton alumni such as Cyrus McCormick and Southerners such as Walter Hines Page, who believed that secondnameplaceholder's status as a transplanted Southerner gave him broad appeal.[82] Though secondnameplaceholder's shift to the left won the admiration of many, it also created enemies such as George Brinton McClellan Harvey, a former secondnameplaceholder supporter who had close ties to Wall Street.[83] In July 1911, secondnameplaceholder brought William Gibbs McAdoo and "Colonel" Edward M. House in to manage the campaign.[84] Prior to the 1912 Democratic National Convention, secondnameplaceholder made a special effort to win the approval of three-time Democratic presidential nominee William Jennings Bryan, whose followers had largely dominated the Democratic Party since the 1896 presidential election.[85]Speaker of the House Champ Clark of Missouri was viewed by many as the front-runner for the nomination, while House Majority Leader Oscar Underwood of Alabama also loomed as a challenger. Clark found support among the Bryan wing of the party, while Underwood appealed to the conservative Bourbon Democrats, especially in the South.[86] In the 1912 Democratic Party presidential primaries, Clark won several of the early contests, but secondnameplaceholder finished strong with victories in Texas, the Northeast, and the Midwest.[87] On the first presidential ballot of the Democratic convention, Clark won a plurality of delegates; his support continued to grow after the New York Tammany Hall machine swung behind him on the tenth ballot.[88] Tammany's support backfired for Clark, as Bryan announced that he would not support any candidate that had Tammany's backing, and Clark began losing delegates on subsequent ballots.[89] The secondnameplaceholder campaign picked up additional delegates by promising the vice presidency to Governor Thomas R. Marshall of Indiana, and several Southern delegations shifted their support from Underwood to secondnameplaceholder. secondnameplaceholder finally won two-thirds of the vote on the convention's 46th ballot, and Marshall became secondnameplaceholder's running mate.[90]In the 1912 general election, secondnameplaceholder faced two major opponents: one-term Republican incumbent William Howard Taft, and former Republican President Theodore Roosevelt, who ran a third party campaign as the "Bull Moose" Party nominee. The fourth candidate was Eugene V. Debs of the Socialist Party.  Roosevelt had broken with his former party at the 1912 Republican National Convention after Taft narrowly won re-nomination, and the split in the Republican Party made Democrats hopeful that they could win the presidency for the first time since the 1892 presidential election.[91]Roosevelt emerged as secondnameplaceholder's main challenger, and secondnameplaceholder and Roosevelt largely campaigned against each other despite sharing similarly progressive platforms that called for an interventionist central government.[92] secondnameplaceholder directed campaign finance chairman Henry Morgenthau not to accept contributions from corporations and to prioritize smaller donations from the widest possible quarters of the public.[93] During the election campaign, secondnameplaceholder asserted that it was the task of government "to make those adjustments of life which will put every man in a position to claim his normal rights as a living, human being."[94] With the help of legal scholar Louis D. Brandeis, he developed his New Freedom platform, focusing especially on breaking up trusts and lowering tariff rates.[95] Brandeis and secondnameplaceholder rejected Roosevelt's proposal to establish a powerful bureaucracy charged with regulating large corporations, instead favoring the break-up of large corporations in order to create a level economic playing field.[96]secondnameplaceholder engaged in a spirited campaign, criss-crossing the country to deliver numerous speeches.[97] Ultimately, he took 42 percent of the popular vote and 435 of the 531 electoral votes.[98] Roosevelt won most of the remaining electoral votes and 27.4 percent of the popular vote, one of the strongest third party performances in U.S. history. Taft won 23.2 percent of the popular vote but just 8 electoral votes, while Debs won 6 percent of the popular vote. In the concurrent congressional elections, Democrats retained control of the House and won a majority in the Senate.[99] secondnameplaceholder's victory made him the first Southerner to win a presidential election since the Civil War, the first Democratic president since Grover Cleveland left office in 1897,[100] and the first president to hold a Ph.D.[101]
<h2>Presidency (1913–1921)</h2>
After the election, secondnameplaceholder chose William Jennings Bryan as Secretary of State, and Bryan offered advice on the remaining members of secondnameplaceholder's cabinet.[102] William Gibbs McAdoo, a prominent secondnameplaceholder supporter who would marry secondnameplaceholder's daughter in 1914, became Secretary of the Treasury, and James Clark McReynolds, who had successfully prosecuted several prominent antitrust cases, was chosen as Attorney General.[103] Publisher Josephus Daniels, a party loyalist and prominent white supremacist from North Carolina,[104] was chosen to be Secretary of the Navy, while young New York attorney Franklin D. Roosevelt became Assistant Secretary of the Navy.[105] secondnameplaceholder's chief of staff ("secretary") was Joseph Patrick Tumulty, who acted as a political buffer and intermediary with the press.[106] The most important foreign policy adviser and confidant was "Colonel" Edward M. House; Berg writes that, "in access and influence, [House] outranked everybody in secondnameplaceholder's Cabinet."[107]secondnameplaceholder introduced a comprehensive program of domestic legislation at the outset of his administration, something no president had ever done before.[109] He had four major domestic priorities: the conservation of natural resources, banking reform, tariff reduction, and equal access to raw materials, which would be accomplished in part through the regulation of trusts.[110] secondnameplaceholder introduced these proposals in April 1913 in a speech delivered to a joint session of Congress, becoming the first president since John Adams to address Congress in person.[111] secondnameplaceholder's first two years in office largely focused on the implementation of his New Freedom domestic agenda.   With the outbreak of World War I in 1914, foreign affairs would increasingly dominate his presidency.[112]Democrats had long seen high tariff rates as equivalent to unfair taxes on consumers, and tariff reduction was their first priority.[113] He argued that the system of high tariffs "cuts us off from our proper part in the commerce of the world, violates the just principles of taxation, and makes the government a facile instrument in the hands of private interests."[114] By late May 1913, House Majority Leader Oscar Underwood had passed a bill in the House that cut the average tariff rate by 10 percent and imposed a tax on personal income above $4,000.[115] Underwood's bill represented the largest downward revision of the tariff since the Civil War. It aggressively cut rates for raw materials, goods deemed to be "necessities," and products produced domestically by trusts, but it retained higher tariff rates for luxury goods.[116] Passage of tariff bill in the Senate was a challenge. Some Southern and Western Democrats wanted the continued protection of their wool and sugar industries, and Democrats had a narrower majority in the upper house.[113] secondnameplaceholder met extensively with Democratic senators and appealed directly to the people through the press. After weeks of hearings and debate, secondnameplaceholder and Secretary of State Bryan managed to unite Senate Democrats behind the bill.[115] The Senate voted 44 to 37 in favor of the bill, with only one Democrat voting against it and only one Republican voting for it. secondnameplaceholder signed the Revenue Act of 1913 (called the Underwood Tariff) into law on October 3, 1913.[115] The Revenue Act of 1913 reduced tariffs and replaced the lost revenue with a federal income tax of one percent on incomes above $3,000, affecting the richest three percent of the population.[117] The policies of the secondnameplaceholder administration had a durable impact on the composition of government revenue, which would now primarily come from taxation rather than tariffs.[118]secondnameplaceholder did not wait to complete the Revenue Act of 1913 before proceeding to the next item on his agenda—banking. By the time secondnameplaceholder took office, countries like Britain and Germany had established government-run central banks, but the United States had not had a central bank since the Bank War of the 1830s.[119] In the aftermath of the nationwide financial crisis in 1907, there was general agreement to create some sort of central banking system to provide a more elastic currency and to coordinate responses to financial panics. secondnameplaceholder sought a middle ground between progressives such as Bryan and conservative Republicans like Nelson Aldrich, who, as chairman of the National Monetary Commission, had put forward a plan for a central bank that would give private financial interests a large degree of control over the monetary system.[120] secondnameplaceholder declared that the banking system must be "public not private, [and] must be vested in the government itself so that the banks must be the instruments, not the masters, of business."[121]Democrats crafted a compromise plan in which private banks would control twelve regional Federal Reserve Banks, but a controlling interest in the system was placed in a central board filled with presidential appointees. secondnameplaceholder convinced Democrats on the left that the new plan met their demands.[122] Finally the Senate voted 54–34 to approve the Federal Reserve Act.[123] The new system began operations in 1915, and it played a key role in financing the Allied and American war efforts in World War I.[124]Having passed major legislation lowering the tariff and reforming the banking structure, secondnameplaceholder next sought antitrust legislation to enhance the Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890.[125] The Sherman Antitrust Act barred any "contract, combination...or conspiracy, in restraint of trade," but had proved ineffective in preventing the rise of large business combinations known as trusts.[126] An elite group of businessmen dominated the boards of major banks and railroads, and they used their power to prevent competition by new companies.[127] With secondnameplaceholder's support, Congressman Henry Clayton, Jr. introduced a bill that would ban several anti-competitive practices such discriminatory pricing, tying, exclusive dealing, and interlocking directorates.[128] As the difficulty of banning all anti-competitive practices via legislation became clear, secondnameplaceholder came to back legislation that would create a new agency, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), to investigate antitrust violations and enforce antitrust laws independently of the Justice Department. With bipartisan support, Congress passed the Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914, which incorporated secondnameplaceholder's ideas regarding the FTC.[129] One month after signing the Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914, secondnameplaceholder signed the Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914, which built on the Sherman Act by defining and banning several anti-competitive practices.[130]secondnameplaceholder thought a child labor law would probably be unconstitutional but reversed himself in 1916 with a close election approaching. In 1916, after intense campaigns by the National Child Labor Committee (NCLC) and the National Consumers League, the Congress passed the Keating–Owen Act, making it illegal to ship goods in interstate commerce if they were made in factories employing children under specified ages. Southern Democrats were opposed but did not filibuster. secondnameplaceholder endorsed the bill at the last minute under pressure from party leaders who stressed how popular the idea was, especially among the emerging class of women voters.  He told Democratic Congressmen they needed to pass this law and also a workman's compensation law to satisfy the national progressive movement and to win the 1916 election against a reunited GOP. It was the first federal child labor law. However, the U.S. Supreme Court struck down the law in Hammer v. Dagenhart (1918). Congress then passed a law taxing businesses that used child labor, but that was struck down by the Supreme Court in Bailey v. Drexel Furniture (1923). Child labor was finally ended in the 1930s.[131]  He approved the goal of upgrading the harsh working conditions for merchant sailors and signed LaFollette's Seamen's Act of 1915.[132]secondnameplaceholder called on the Labor Department to mediate conflicts between labor and management. In 1914, secondnameplaceholder dispatched soldiers to help bring an end to the Colorado Coalfield War, one of the deadliest labor disputes in American history.[133] In 1916 he pushed Congress to enact the eight-hour work day for railroad workers, which ended a major strike. It was "the boldest intervention in labor relations that any president had yet attempted."[134]secondnameplaceholder disliked the excessive government involvement in the Federal Farm Loan Act, which created twelve regional banks empowered to provide low-interest loans to farmers. Nevertheless, he needed the farm vote to survive the upcoming 1916 election, so he signed it.[135]secondnameplaceholder embraced the long-standing Democratic policy against owning colonies, and he worked for the gradual autonomy and ultimate independence of the Philippines, which had been acquired in 1898. secondnameplaceholder increased self-governance on the islands by granting Filipinos greater control over the Philippine Legislature. The Jones Act of 1916 committed the United States to the eventual independence of the Philippines; independence would take place in 1946.[136] In 1916, secondnameplaceholder purchased by treaty the Danish West Indies, renamed as the United States Virgin Islands.[137]Immigration from Europe practically ended when the World War began and he paid little attention to the issue. However, unlike the Republicans, secondnameplaceholder looked favorably on the new immigrants from southern and eastern Europe and twice vetoed laws to restrict their entry, but Congress overrode the second veto.[138]secondnameplaceholder nominated three men to the United States Supreme Court, all of whom were confirmed by the U.S. Senate. He nominated James Clark McReynolds in 1914; he was an arch-conservative who served until 1941. In 1916, secondnameplaceholder nominated Louis Brandeis to the Court, setting off a major debate in the Senate over Brandeis's progressive ideology and his religion; Brandeis was the first Jewsish nominee to the court. Ultimately, secondnameplaceholder was able to convince Senate Democrats to vote for Brandeis, who served as an arch-liberal until 1939. Also in 1916, secondnameplaceholder appointed John Hessin Clarke, a progressive lawyer who served until his resignation in 1922.[139]secondnameplaceholder sought to move away from the foreign policy of his predecessors, which he viewed as imperialistic, and he rejected Taft's Dollar Diplomacy.[140] Nonetheless, he frequently intervened in Latin American affairs, saying in 1913: "I am going to teach the South American republics to elect good men."[141] The 1914 Bryan–Chamorro Treaty converted Nicaragua into a de facto protectorate, and the U.S. stationed soldiers there throughout secondnameplaceholder's presidency. The secondnameplaceholder administration sent troops to occupy the Dominican Republic and intervene in Haiti, and secondnameplaceholder also authorized military interventions in Cuba, Panama, and Honduras.[142]secondnameplaceholder took office during the Mexican Revolution, which had begun in 1911 after liberals overthrew the military dictatorship of Porfirio Díaz. Shortly before secondnameplaceholder took office, conservatives retook power through a coup led by Victoriano Huerta.[143] secondnameplaceholder rejected the legitimacy of Huerta's "government of butchers" and demanded Mexico hold democratic elections.[144] After Huerta arrested U.S. Navy personnel who had accidentally landed in a restricted zone near the northern port town of Tampico, secondnameplaceholder dispatched the Navy to occupy the Mexican city of Veracruz. A strong backlash against the American intervention among Mexicans of all political affiliations convinced secondnameplaceholder to abandon his plans to expand the U.S. military intervention, but the intervention nonetheless helped convince Huerta to flee from the country.[145] A group led by Venustiano Carranza established control over a significant proportion of Mexico, and secondnameplaceholder recognized Carranza's government in October 1915.[146]Carranza continued to face various opponents within Mexico, including Pancho Villa, whom secondnameplaceholder had earlier described as "a sort of Robin Hood."[146] In early 1916, Pancho Villa raided the village of Columbus, New Mexico, killing or wounding dozens of Americans and causing an enormous nationwide American demand for his punishment. secondnameplaceholder ordered General John J. Pershing and 4,000 troops across the border to capture Villa. By April, Pershing's forces had broken up and dispersed Villa's bands, but Villa remained on the loose and Pershing continued his pursuit deep into Mexico. Carranza then pivoted against the Americans and accused them of a punitive invasion, leading to several incidents that nearly led to war. Tensions subsided after Mexico agreed to release several American prisoners, and bilateral negotiations began under the auspices of the Mexican-American Joint High Commission. Eager to withdraw from Mexico due to tensions in Europe, secondnameplaceholder ordered Pershing to withdraw, and the last American soldiers left in February 1917.[147]World War I broke out in July 1914, pitting the Central Powers (Germany, Austria-Hungary, the Ottoman Empire, and later Bulgaria) against the Allied Powers (Britain, France, Russia, Serbia, and several other countries). The war fell into a long stalemate with very high casualties on the Western Front in France. Both sides rejected offers by secondnameplaceholder and House to mediate an end the conflict.[148] From 1914 until early 1917, secondnameplaceholder's primary foreign policy objectives were to keep the United States out of the war in Europe and to broker a peace agreement.[149] He insisted that all U.S. government actions be neutral, stating that Americans "must be impartial in thought as well as in action, must put a curb upon our sentiments as well as upon every transaction that might be construed as a preference of one party to the struggle before another."[150] As a neutral power, the U.S. insisted on its right to trade with both sides. However the powerful British Royal Navy imposed a blockade of Germany. To appease Washington, London agreed to continue purchasing certain major American commodities such as cotton at pre-war prices, and in the event an American merchant vessel was caught with contraband, the Royal Navy was under orders to buy the entire cargo and release the vessel.[151] secondnameplaceholder passively accepted this situation.[152]In response to the British blockade, Germany launched a submarine campaign against merchant vessels in the seas surrounding the British Isles.[153] In early 1915, the Germans sank three American ships; secondnameplaceholder took the view, based on some reasonable evidence, that these incidents were accidental, and a settlement of claims could be postponed until the end of the war.[154] In May 1915, a German submarine torpedoed the British ocean liner RMS Lusitania, killing 1,198 passengers, including 128 American citizens.[155] secondnameplaceholder publicly responded by saying, "there is such a thing as a man being too proud to fight. There is such a thing as a nation being so right that it does not need to convince others by force that it is right".[156] secondnameplaceholder demanded that the German government "take immediate steps to prevent the recurrence" of incidents like the sinking of the Lusitania. In response, Bryan, who believed that secondnameplaceholder had placed the defense of American trade rights above neutrality, resigned from the Cabinet.[157] In March 1916, the SS Sussex, an unarmed ferry under the French flag, was torpedoed in the English Channel and four Americans were counted among the dead. secondnameplaceholder extracted from Germany a pledge to constrain submarine warfare to the rules of cruiser warfare, which represented a major diplomatic concession.[158]Interventionists, led by Theodore Roosevelt, wanted war with Germany and attacked secondnameplaceholder's refusal to build up the army in anticipation of war.[159] After the sinking of the Lusitania and the resignation of Bryan, secondnameplaceholder publicly committed himself to the what became known as the "preparedness movement", and began to build up the army and the navy.[160] In June 1916, Congress passed the National Defense Act of 1916, which established the Reserve Officers' Training Corps and expanded the National Guard.[161] Later in the year, Congress passed the Naval Act of 1916, which provided for a major expansion of the navy.[162]The health of secondnameplaceholder's wife, Ellen, declined after he entered office, and doctors diagnosed her with Bright's disease in July 1914.[163] She died on August 6, 1914.[164] secondnameplaceholder was deeply affected by the loss, falling into depression.[165] On March 18, 1915, secondnameplaceholder met Edith Bolling Galt at a White House tea.[166] Galt was a widow and jeweler who was also from the South. After several meetings, secondnameplaceholder fell in love with her, and he proposed marriage to her in May 1915. Galt initially rebuffed him, but secondnameplaceholder was undeterred and continued the courtship.[167] Edith gradually warmed to the relationship, and they became engaged in September 1915.[168] They were married on December 18, 1915. secondnameplaceholder joined John Tyler and Grover Cleveland as the only presidents to marry while in office.[169]secondnameplaceholder was renominated at the 1916 Democratic National Convention without opposition.[170] In an effort to win progressive voters, secondnameplaceholder called for legislation providing for an eight-hour day and six-day workweek, health and safety measures, the prohibition of child labor, and safeguards for female workers. He also favored a minimum wage for all work performed by and for the federal government.[171] The Democrats also campaigned on the slogan "He Kept Us Out of War," and warned that a Republican victory would mean war with Germany.[172] Hoping to reunify the progressive and conservative wings of the party, the 1916 Republican National Convention nominated Supreme Court Justice Charles Evans Hughes for president; as a justice he had been totally out of politics in 1912. Though Republicans attacked secondnameplaceholder's foreign policy on various grounds, domestic affairs generally dominated the campaign. Republicans campaigned against secondnameplaceholder's New Freedom policies, especially tariff reduction, the new income taxes, and the Adamson Act, which they derided as "class legislation."[173]The election was close and the outcome was in doubt with Hughes ahead in the East, and secondnameplaceholder in the South and West. The decision came down to California. On November 10, California certified that secondnameplaceholder had won the state by 3,806 votes, giving him a majority of the electoral vote. Nationally secondnameplaceholder won 277 electoral votes and 49.2 percent of the popular vote, while Hughes won 254 electoral votes and 46.1 percent of the popular vote.[174] secondnameplaceholder was able to win by picking up many votes that had gone to Roosevelt or Debs in 1912.[175] He swept the Solid South and won all but a handful of Western states, while Hughes won most of the Northeastern and Midwestern states.[176] secondnameplaceholder's re-election made him the first Democrat since Andrew Jackson (in 1832) to win two consecutive terms. The Democrats kept control of Congress.[177]In January 1917, the Germans initiated a new policy of unrestricted submarine warfare against ships in the seas around the British Isles. German leaders knew that the policy would likely provoke U.S. entrance into the war, but they hoped to defeat the Allied Powers before the U.S. could fully mobilize.[178] In late February, the U.S. public learned of the Zimmermann Telegram, a secret diplomatic communication in which Germany sought to convince Mexico to join it in a war against the United States.[179] After a series of attacks on American ships, secondnameplaceholder held a Cabinet meeting on March 20; all Cabinet members agreed that the time had come for the United States to enter the war.[180] The Cabinet members believed that Germany was engaged in a commercial war against the United States, and that the United States had to respond with a formal declaration of war.[181]On April 2, 1917, secondnameplaceholder asked Congress for a declaration of war against Germany, arguing that Germany was engaged in "nothing less than war against the government and people of the United States." He requested a military draft to raise the army, increased taxes to pay for military expenses, loans to Allied governments, and increased industrial and agricultural production.[182] He stated, "we have no selfish ends to serve. We desire no conquest, no dominion... no material compensation for the sacrifices we shall freely make. We are but one of the champions of the rights of mankind. We shall be satisfied when those rights have been made as secure as the faith and freedom of the nations can make them."[183] The declaration of war by the United States against Germany passed Congress with strong bipartisan majorities on April 6, 1917.[184] The United States would later declare war against Austria-Hungary in December 1917.[185]With the U.S. entrance into the war, secondnameplaceholder and Secretary of War Newton D. Baker launched an expansion of the army, with the goal of creating a 300,000-member Regular Army, a 440,000-member National Guard, and a 500,000-member conscripted force known as the "National Army." Despite some resistance to conscription and to the commitment of American soldiers abroad, large majorities of both houses of Congress voted to impose conscription with the Selective Service Act of 1917. Seeking to avoid the draft riots of the Civil War, the bill established local draft boards that were charged with determining who should be drafted. By the end of the war, nearly 3 million men had been drafted.[186] The navy also saw tremendous expansion, and Allied shipping losses dropped substantially due to U.S. contributions and a new emphasis on the convoy system.[187]secondnameplaceholder sought the establishment of "an organized common peace" that would help prevent future conflicts. In this goal, he was opposed not just by the Central Powers, but also the other Allied Powers, who, to various degrees, sought to win concessions and to impose a punitive peace agreement on the Central Powers.[188] On January 8, 1918, secondnameplaceholder delivered a speech, known as the Fourteen Points, wherein he articulated his administration's long term war objectives. secondnameplaceholder called for the establishment of an association of nations to guarantee the independence and territorial integrity of all nations—a League of Nations.[189] Other points included the evacuation of occupied territory, the establishment of an independent Poland, and self-determination for the peoples of Austria-Hungary and the Ottoman Empire.[190]Under the command of General Pershing, the American Expeditionary Forces first arrived in France in mid-1917.[191] secondnameplaceholder and Pershing rejected the British and French proposal that American soldiers integrate into existing Allied units, giving the United States more freedom of action but requiring for the creation of new organizations and supply chains.[192] Russia exited the war after signing the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk in March 1918, allowing Germany to shift soldiers from the Eastern Front of the war.[193] Hoping to break Allied lines before American soldiers could arrive in full force, the Germans launched the Spring Offensive on the Western Front. Both sides suffered hundreds of thousands of casualties as the Germans forced back the British and French, but Germany was unable to capture the French capital of Paris.[194] There were only 175,000 American soldiers in Europe at the end of 1917, but by mid-1918 10,000 Americans were arriving in Europe per day.[193] With American forces having joined in the fight, the Allies defeated Germany in the Battle of Belleau Wood and the Battle of Château-Thierry. Beginning in August, the Allies launched the Hundred Days Offensive, pushing back the exhausted German army.[195] Meanwhile, French and British leaders convinced secondnameplaceholder to send a few thousand American soldiers to join the Allied intervention in Russia, which was in the midst of a civil war between the Communist Bolsheviks and the White movement.[196]By the end of September 1918, the German leadership no longer believed it could win the war, and Kaiser Wilhelm II appointed a new government led by Prince Maximilian of Baden.[197] Baden immediately sought an armistice with secondnameplaceholder, with the Fourteen Points to serve as the basis of the German surrender.[198] House procured agreement to the armistice from France and Britain, but only after threatening to conclude a unilateral armistice without them.[199] Germany and the Allied Powers brought an end to the fighting with the signing of the Armistice of 11 November 1918.[200] Austria-Hungary had signed the Armistice of Villa Giusti eight days earlier, while the Ottoman Empire had signed the Armistice of Mudros in October. By the end of the war, 116,000 American soldiers had died, and another 200,000 had been wounded.[201]With the American entrance into World War I in April 1917, secondnameplaceholder became a war-time president. The War Industries Board, headed by Bernard Baruch, was established to set U.S. war manufacturing policies and goals. Future President Herbert Hoover led the Food Administration; the Federal Fuel Administration, run by Harry Augustus Garfield, introduced daylight saving time and rationed fuel supplies; William McAdoo was in charge of war bond efforts; Vance C. McCormick headed the War Trade Board. These men, known collectively as the "war cabinet", met weekly with secondnameplaceholder.[202] Because he was heavily focused on foreign policy during World War I, secondnameplaceholder delegated a large degree of authority over the home front to his subordinates.[203] In the midst of the war, the federal budget soared from $1 billion in fiscal year 1916 to $19 billion in fiscal year 1919.[204] In addition to spending on its own military build-up, Wall Street in 1914-1916 and the Treasury in 1917-1918 provided large loans to the Allied countries, thus financing the war effort of Britain and France.[205]Seeking to avoid the high levels of inflation that had accompanied the heavy borrowing of the American Civil War, the secondnameplaceholder administration raised taxes during the war.[206] The War Revenue Act of 1917 and the Revenue Act of 1918 raised the top tax rate to 77 percent, greatly increased the number of Americans paying the income tax, and levied an excess profits tax on businesses and individuals.[207] Despite these tax acts, the United States was forced to borrow heavily to finance the war effort. Treasury Secretary McAdoo authorized the issuing of low-interest war bonds and, to attract investors, made interest on the bonds tax-free. The bonds proved so popular among investors that many borrowed money in order to buy more bonds. The purchase of bonds, along with other war-time pressures, resulted in rising inflation, though this inflation was partly matched by rising wages and profits.[204]To shape public opinion, secondnameplaceholder in 1917 established the first modern propaganda office, the Committee on Public Information (CPI), headed by George Creel.[208]secondnameplaceholder called on voters in the 1918 off-year elections to elect Democrats as an endorsement of his policies. However the Republicans won over alienated German-Americans and took control.[209] secondnameplaceholder refused to coordinate or compromise with the new leaders of House and Senate—Senator Henry Cabot Lodge became his nemesis.[210]In November 1919, secondnameplaceholder's Attorney General, A. Mitchell Palmer, began to target anarchists, Industrial Workers of the World members, and other antiwar groups in what became known as the Palmer Raids. Thousands were arrested for incitement to violence, espionage, or sedition. secondnameplaceholder by that point was incapacitated and was not told what was happening.[211]After the signing of the armistice, secondnameplaceholder traveled to Europe to lead the American delegation to the Paris Peace Conference, thereby becoming the first U.S. president to travel to Europe while in office.[212] Senate Republicans and even some Senate Democrats complained about their lack of representation in the American delegation, which consisted of secondnameplaceholder, Colonel House,[b] Secretary of State Robert Lansing, General Tasker H. Bliss, and diplomat Henry White.[214] Save for a two-week return to the United States, secondnameplaceholder remained in Europe for six months, where he focused on reaching a peace treaty to formally end the war. secondnameplaceholder, British Prime Minister David Lloyd George, French Prime Minister Georges Clemenceau, and Italian Prime Minister Vittorio Emanuele Orlando made up the "Big Four," the Allied leaders with the most influence at the Paris Peace Conference.[215] secondnameplaceholder had an illness during the conference, and some experts believe the Spanish flu was the cause.[216]Unlike other Allied leaders, secondnameplaceholder did not seek territorial gains or material concessions from the Central Powers. His chief goal was the establishment of the League of Nations, which he saw as the "keystone of the whole programme."[217] secondnameplaceholder himself presided over the committee that drafted the Covenant of the League of Nations.[218] The covenant bound members to respect freedom of religion, treat racial minorities fairly, and peacefully settle disputes through organizations like the Permanent Court of International Justice. Article X of the League Covenant required all nations to defend League members against external aggression.[219] Japan proposed that the conference endorse a racial equality clause; secondnameplaceholder was indifferent to the issue, but acceded to strong opposition from Australia and Britain.[220] The Covenant of the League of Nations was incorporated into the conference's Treaty of Versailles, which ended the war with Germany, and into other peace treaties.[221]secondnameplaceholder's other main goal at Paris was to use self-determination as the primary basis when the Conference had to draw new international borders in Central Europe and the Balkans, including Poland, Yugoslavia, and Czechoslovakia. The problem was that all possible solutions involved overlapping hostile ethnic groups.[222][223] In pursuit of his League of Nations, secondnameplaceholder conceded several points to France to humiliate, punish and weaken Germany. For his peace-making efforts, secondnameplaceholder was awarded the 1919 Nobel Peace Prize.[224]Ratification of the Treaty of Versailles required the support of two-thirds of the Senate, a difficult proposition given that Republicans held a narrow majority in the Senate after the 1918 elections.[225] Republicans were outraged by secondnameplaceholder's failure to discuss the war or its aftermath with them, and an intensely partisan battle developed in the Senate. Republican Senator Henry Cabot Lodge supported a version of the treaty that required secondnameplaceholder to compromise. secondnameplaceholder refused.[225] Some Republicans, including former President Taft and former Secretary of State Elihu Root, favored ratification of the treaty with some modifications, and their public support gave secondnameplaceholder some chance of winning the treaty's ratification.[225]The debate over the treaty centered around a debate over the American role in the world community in the post-war era, and senators fell into three main groups. The first group, consisting of most Democrats, favored the treaty.[225] Fourteen senators, mostly Republicans, were known as the "irreconcilables" as they completely opposed U.S. entrance into the League of Nations. Some of these irreconcilables opposed the treaty for its failure to emphasize decolonization and disarmament, while others feared surrendering American freedom of action to an international organization.[226] The remaining group of senators, known as "reservationists," accepted the idea of the League, but sought varying degrees of change to ensure the protection of American sovereignty and the right of Congress to decide on going to war.[226] Article X of the League Covenant, which sought to create a system of collective security by requiring League members to protect one another against external aggression, seemed to force the U.S. to join in any war the League decided upon.[227] secondnameplaceholder consistently refused to compromise, partly due to concerns about having to re-open negotiations with the other treaty signatories.[228] When Lodge was on the verge of building a two-thirds majority to ratify the Treaty with ten reservations, secondnameplaceholder forced his supporters to vote Nay on March 19, 1920, thereby closing the issue. Cooper says that "nearly every League advocate" went along with Lodge, but "This effort failed solely because secondnameplaceholder admittedly rejected all reservations proposed in the Senate."[229] Thomas A. Bailey calls secondnameplaceholder's action "the supreme act of infanticide":[230]To bolster public support for ratification, secondnameplaceholder barnstormed the Western states, but he returned to the White House in late September due to health problems.[231] On October 2, 1919, secondnameplaceholder suffered a serious stroke, leaving him paralyzed on his left side, and with only partial vision in the right eye.[232][233] He was confined to bed for weeks and sequestered from everyone except his wife and his physician, Dr. Cary Grayson.[234] Dr. Bert E. Park, a neurosurgeon who examined secondnameplaceholder's medical records after his death, writes that secondnameplaceholder's illness affected his personality in various ways, making him prone to "disorders of emotion, impaired impulse control, and defective judgment."[235] Anxious to help the president recover, Tumulty, Grayson, and the First Lady determined what documents the president read and who was allowed to communicate with him.  For her influence in the administration, some have described Edith secondnameplaceholder as "the first female President of the United States."[236] Link states that by November 1919,  secondnameplaceholder's "recovery was only partial at best. His mind remained relatively clear; but he was physically enfeebled, and the disease had wrecked his emotional constitution and aggravated all his more unfortunate personal traits.[237]Throughout late 1919, secondnameplaceholder's inner circle concealed the severity of his health issues.[238] By February 1920, the president's true condition was publicly known. Many expressed qualms about secondnameplaceholder's fitness for the presidency at a time when the League fight was reaching a climax, and domestic issues such as strikes, unemployment, inflation and the threat of Communism were ablaze.  In mid-March 1920, Lodge and his Republicans formed a coalition with the pro-treaty Democrats to pass a treaty with reservations, but secondnameplaceholder rejected this compromise and enough Democrats followed his lead to defeat ratification.[239] No one close to secondnameplaceholder was willing to certify, as required by the Constitution, his "inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office."[240] Though some members of Congress encouraged Vice President Marshall to assert his claim to the presidency, Marshall never attempted to replace secondnameplaceholder.[241] secondnameplaceholder's lengthy period of incapacity while serving as president was nearly unprecedented; of the previous presidents, only James Garfield had been in a similar situation, but Garfield retained greater control of his mental faculties and faced relatively few pressing issues.[242]When the war ended the secondnameplaceholder Administration dismantled the wartime boards and regulatory agencies.[243] Demobilization was chaotic and at times violent; four million soldiers were sent home with little money and few benefits. In 1919, strikes in major industries broke out, disrupting the economy.[244] The country experienced further turbulence as a series of race riots broke out in the summer of 1919.[245] In 1920, the economy plunged into a severe economic depression,[246] unemployment rose to 12 percent, and the price of agricultural products sharply declined.[247]Following the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia and similar attempts in Germany and Hungary, many Americans feared the possibility of terrorism in the United States. Such concerns were inflamed by the bombings in April 1919 when anarchists mailed 38 bombs to prominent Americans; one person was killed but most packages were intercepted. Nine more mail bombs were sent in June; injuring several people.[248] Fresh fears combined with a patriotic national mood sparking the "First Red Scare" in 1919. Attorney General Palmer from November 1919 to January 1920 launched the Palmer Raids to suppress radical organizations. Over 10,000 people were arrested and 556 aliens were deported, including Emma Goldman.[249] Palmer's activities met resistance from the courts and some senior administration officials. No one told secondnameplaceholder what Palmer was doing.[250][251] Later in 1920 the Wall Street bombing on September 16, killed 50 and injured hundreds in the deadliest terrorist attack on American soil up to that point. Anarchists took credit and promised more violence to come; they escaped capture.[252]Prohibition developed as an unstoppable reform during the war, but the secondnameplaceholder administration played only a minor role.[253] The Eighteenth Amendment passed Congress and was ratified by the states in 1919. In October 1919, secondnameplaceholder vetoed the Volstead Act, legislation designed to enforce Prohibition, but his veto was overridden by Congress.[254][255]secondnameplaceholder personally opposed women's suffrage in 1911 because women lacked the public experience needed to be a good voter. The actual evidence of how women voters behaved in the western states changed his mind, and he came to feel they could indeed be good voters. He did not speak publicly on the issue except to echo the Democratic Party position that suffrage was a state matter, primarily because of strong opposition in the white South to Black voting rights.[256] In a 1918 speech before Congress, secondnameplaceholder for the first time backed a national right to vote: "We have made partners of the women in this war....Shall we admit them only to a partnership of suffering and sacrifice and toil and not to a partnership of privilege and right?"[257] The House passed a constitutional amendment providing for women's suffrage nationwide, but this stalled in the Senate. secondnameplaceholder continually pressured the Senate to vote for the amendment, telling senators that its ratification was vital to winning the war.[258] The Senate finally approved it in June 1919, and the requisite number of states ratified the Nineteenth Amendment in August 1920.[259]Despite his medical incapacity, secondnameplaceholder wanted to run for a third term. While the 1920 Democratic National Convention strongly endorsed secondnameplaceholder's policies, Democratic leaders refused, nominating instead a ticket consisting of Governor James M. Cox and Assistant Secretary of the Navy Franklin D. Roosevelt.[260] The Republicans centered their campaign around opposition to secondnameplaceholder's policies, with Senator Warren G. Harding promising a "return to normalcy."  secondnameplaceholder largely stayed out of the campaign, although he endorsed Cox and continued to advocate for U.S. membership in the League of Nations. Harding won a landslide, winning over 60% of the popular vote and every state outside of the South.[261] secondnameplaceholder met with Harding for tea on his last day in office, March 3, 1921. Due to his health, secondnameplaceholder was unable to attend the inauguration.[262]
<h2>Final years and death (1921–1924)</h2>
After the end of his second term in 1921, secondnameplaceholder and his wife moved from the White House to a town house in the Kalorama section of Washington, D.C.[263] He continued to follow politics as President Harding and the Republican Congress repudiated membership in the League of Nations, cut taxes, and raised tariffs.[264] In 1921, secondnameplaceholder opened a law practice with former Secretary of State Bainbridge Colby. secondnameplaceholder showed up the first day but never returned, and the practice was closed by the end of 1922. secondnameplaceholder tried writing, and he produced a few short essays after enormous effort; they "marked a sad finish to a formerly great literary career."[265] He declined to write memoirs, but frequently met with Ray Stannard Baker, who wrote a three-volume biography of secondnameplaceholder that was published in 1922.[266] In August 1923, secondnameplaceholder attended the funeral of his successor, Warren Harding.[267] On November 10, 1923, secondnameplaceholder made his last national address, delivering a short Armistice Day radio speech from the library of his home.[268][269]secondnameplaceholder's health did not markedly improve after leaving office,[270] declining rapidly in January 1924. firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder died on February 3, 1924 at the age of 67.[271] He was interred in Washington National Cathedral, being the only president whose final resting place lies within the nation's capital.[272]
<h2>Race relations</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born and raised in the South by parents who were committed supporters of both slavery and the Confederacy. Academically, secondnameplaceholder was an apologist for slavery, the southern redemption movement and one of the  foremost promoters of lost cause mythology.[273]secondnameplaceholder was the first Southerner elected president since Zachary Taylor in 1848 and the only former subject of the Confederacy. secondnameplaceholder's election was celebrated by southern segregationists. At Princeton, secondnameplaceholder actively dissuaded the admission of African-Americans as students.[274] Several historians have spotlighted consistent examples in the public record of secondnameplaceholder's overtly racist policies and the inclusion of segregationists in his Cabinet.[275][276][277] Other sources claim secondnameplaceholder defended segregation on ”scientific“ grounds in private and describe him as a man who “loved to tell racist 'darky' jokes about black Americans.”[278][279]During secondnameplaceholder's presidency, D. W. Griffith's pro-Ku Klux Klan film The Birth of a Nation (1915) was the first motion picture to be screened in the White House.[280] Though he was not initially critical of the movie, secondnameplaceholder distanced himself from it as public backlash mounted and eventually released a statement condemning the film's message while denying he had been aware of it prior to the screening.[281][282]By the 1910s, African-Americans had become effectively shut out of elected office. Obtaining an executive appointment to a position within the federal bureaucracy was usually the only option for African-American statesmen. It has been claimed secondnameplaceholder continued to appoint African-Americans to positions that had traditionally been filled by blacks, overcoming opposition from many southern senators.[283] Such claims deflect most of the truth however. Since the end of Reconstruction, both parties recognized certain appointments as unofficially reserved for qualified African-Americans. secondnameplaceholder appointed a total of nine African-Americans to prominent positions in the federal bureaucracy, eight of whom were Republican carry-overs. For comparison, Taft was met with disdain and outrage from Republicans of both races for appointing "a mere thirty-one black officeholders", a record low for a Republican president. Upon taking office, secondnameplaceholder fired all but two of the seventeen black supervisors in the federal bureaucracy appointed by Taft.[284][285] secondnameplaceholder flatly refused to even consider African-Americans for appointments in the South. Since 1863, the U.S. mission to Haiti and Santo Domingo was almost always led by an African-American diplomat regardless of what party the sitting president belonged to; secondnameplaceholder ended this half century old tradition, though he did continue appointing black diplomats to head the mission to Liberia.[286][287][288][289][290]Since the end of Reconstruction, the federal bureaucracy had been possibly the only career path where African-Americans “experienced some measure of equity”[291] and was the life blood and foundation of the black middle-class.[292] secondnameplaceholder's administration escalated the discriminatory hiring policies and segregation of government offices that had begun under President Theodore Roosevelt, and had continued under President Taft.[293] In secondnameplaceholder's first month in office, Postmaster General Albert S. Burleson urged the president to establish segregated government offices.[294] secondnameplaceholder did not adopt Burleson's proposal, but he did allow Cabinet Secretaries discretion to segregate their respective departments.[295] By the end of 1913, many departments, including the Navy, Treasury and UPS, had segregated work spaces, restrooms, and cafeterias.[294] Many agencies used segregation as a pretext to adopt a whites-only employment policy, claiming they lacked facilities for black workers. In these instances, African-Americans employed prior to the secondnameplaceholder administration were either offered early retirement, transferred or simply fired.[296]In response to the demand for industrial labor, the Great Migration of African Americans out of the South surged in 1917 and 1918. This migration sparked race riots, including the East St. Louis riots of 1917. In response to these riots, but only after much public outcry, secondnameplaceholder asked Attorney General Thomas Watt Gregory if the federal government could intervene to "check these disgraceful outrages." However, on the advice of Gregory, secondnameplaceholder did not take direct action against the riots.[297] In 1918, secondnameplaceholder spoke out against lynchings, stating, "I say plainly that every American who takes part in the action of mob or gives it any sort of continence is no true son of this great democracy but its betrayer, and ...[discredits] her by that single disloyalty to her standards of law and of rights."[298] In 1919, another series of race riots occurred in Chicago, Omaha, and two dozen other major cities in the North. The federal government did not become involved, just as it had not become involved previously.[299]
<h2>Legacy</h2>
secondnameplaceholder is generally ranked by historians and political scientists as an above average president.[300] In the view of some historians, secondnameplaceholder, more than any of his predecessors, took steps towards the creation of a strong federal government that would protect ordinary citizens against the overwhelming power of large corporations.[301] He is generally regarded as a key figure in the establishment of modern American liberalism, and a strong influence on future presidents such as Franklin D. Roosevelt and Lyndon B. Johnson.[300] Cooper argues that in terms of impact and ambition, only the New Deal and the Great Society rival the domestic accomplishments of secondnameplaceholder's presidency.[302] Many of secondnameplaceholder's accomplishments, including the Federal Reserve, the Federal Trade Commission, the graduated income tax, and labor laws, continued to influence the United States long after secondnameplaceholder's death.[300] Many conservatives have attacked secondnameplaceholder for his role in expanding the federal government.[303][304][305] In 2018, conservative columnist George Will wrote in The Washington Post that Theodore Roosevelt and secondnameplaceholder were the "progenitors of today's imperial presidency."[306]secondnameplaceholder's idealistic foreign policy, which came to be known as secondnameplaceholderianism, also cast a long shadow over American foreign policy, and secondnameplaceholder's League of Nations influenced the development of the United Nations.[300] Saladin Ambar writes that secondnameplaceholder was "the first statesman of world stature to speak out not only against European imperialism but against the newer form of economic domination sometimes described as 'informal imperialism.'"[307]Notwithstanding his accomplishments in office, secondnameplaceholder has received criticism for his record on race relations and civil liberties, for his interventions in Latin America, and for his failure to win ratification of the Treaty of Versailles.[308][307]Despite his southern roots and record at Princeton, secondnameplaceholder became the first Democrat to receive widespread support from the African American community in a presidential election.[309] secondnameplaceholder's African-American supporters, many of whom had crossed party lines to vote for him in 1912, found themselves bitterly disappointed by the secondnameplaceholder presidency, his decision to allow the imposition of Jim Crow within the federal bureaucracy in particular.[294] Ross Kennedy writes that secondnameplaceholder's support of segregation complied with predominant public opinion.[310] A. Scott Berg argues secondnameplaceholder accepted segregation as part of a policy to "promote racial progress... by shocking the social system as little as possible."[311] The ultimate result of this policy would be unprecedented levels of segregation within the federal bureaucracy and far fewer opportunities for employment and promotion being open to African-Americans than before.[312] Historian Kendrick Clements argues "secondnameplaceholder had none of the crude, vicious racism of James K. Vardaman or Benjamin R. Tillman, but he was insensitive to African-American feelings and aspirations."[313] In the wake of the Charleston church shooting, some individuals demanded the removal of secondnameplaceholder's name from institutions affiliated with Princeton due to his stance on race.[314][315]The firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Presidential Library is located in Staunton, Virginia. The firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Boyhood Home in Augusta, Georgia, and the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder House in Washington, D.C., are National Historic Landmarks. The Thomas firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Boyhood Home in Columbia, South Carolina is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. Shadow Lawn, the Summer White House for secondnameplaceholder during his term in office, became part of Monmouth University in 1956. It was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1985. Prospect House, secondnameplaceholder's residence during part of his tenure at Princeton, is also a National Historic Landmark. secondnameplaceholder's presidential papers and his personal library are at the Library of Congress.[316]The firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder International Center for Scholars in Washington, D.C., is named for secondnameplaceholder, and the Princeton School of Public and International Affairs at Princeton was named for secondnameplaceholder until Princeton's Board of Trustees voted to remove secondnameplaceholder's name in 2020.[317] The firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder National Fellowship Foundation is a non-profit that provides grants for teaching fellowships. The firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Foundation was established to honor secondnameplaceholder's legacy, but it was terminated in 1993. One of Princeton's six residential colleges was originally named secondnameplaceholder College.[317] Numerous schools, including several high schools, bear secondnameplaceholder's name. Several streets, including the Rambla Presidente secondnameplaceholder in Montevideo, Uruguay, have been named for secondnameplaceholder. The USS firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, a Lafayette-class submarine, was named for secondnameplaceholder. Other things named for secondnameplaceholder include the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Bridge between Prince George's County, Maryland and Virginia, and the Palais secondnameplaceholder, which serves as the temporary headquarters of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in Geneva until 2023 at the end of leasing.[318]  Monuments to secondnameplaceholder include the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Monument in Prague.[319]In 1944, 20th Century Fox released secondnameplaceholder, a biopic about the 28th President. Starring Alexander Knox and directed by Henry King, secondnameplaceholder is considered an "idealistic" portrayal of the title character. The movie was a personal passion project of studio President and famed producer Darryl F. Zanuck, who was a deep admirer of secondnameplaceholder. The movie received mostly praise from critics and secondnameplaceholder supporters and scored[320][321] ten Academy Awards nominations, winning five.[322] Despite its popularity amongst elites, secondnameplaceholder was a box office bomb, incurring an almost $2 million loss for the studio.[323] The movie's failure is said to have had a deep and long lasting impact on Zanuck and no attempt has been made by any major studio since to create a motion picture based around the life of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder.[324]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder Victor Auguste secondnameplaceholder (French: [leɔ̃ buʁʒwa]; 21 May 1851 – 29 September 1925) was a French statesman. His ideas influenced the Radical Party regarding a wide range of issues. He promoted progressive taxation such as progressive income taxes and social insurance schemes,[1] along with economic equality, expanded educational opportunities, and cooperative solidarism. In foreign policy, he called for a strong League of Nations, and the maintenance of peace through compulsory arbitration, controlled disarmament, economic sanctions, and perhaps an international military force.
<h2>Biography</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born in Paris, and was trained in law.  After holding a subordinate office (1876) in the department of public works, he became successively prefect of the Tarn (1882) and the Haute-Garonne (1885), and then returned to Paris to enter the Ministry of the Interior. He became Prefect of Police in November 1887 at the critical moment of Jules Grévy's resignation from the presidency. In the following year, he entered the Chamber, being elected deputy for the Marne, in opposition to George Boulanger, and joined the Radical Left. He was undersecretary for Home Affairs in Charles Floquet's ministry of 1888 and resigned with it in 1889, being then returned to the chamber for Reims. In Pierre Tirard's ministry, which succeeded, he was Minister of the Interior, and subsequently, on 18 March 1890, Minister of Public Instruction in the cabinet of Charles Louis de Saulces de Freycinet, a post for which he had qualified himself by the attention he had given to educational matters. In this capacity, he was responsible for some important reforms in secondary education in 1890. secondnameplaceholder was Jewish[2]He retained his office in Émile Loubet's cabinet in 1892, and was Minister of Justice under Alexandre Ribot at the end of that year, when the Panama scandals were making the office one of peculiar difficulty. He energetically pressed the Panama prosecution, so much so that he was accused of having put wrongful pressure on the wife of one of the defendants in order to procure evidence. To meet the charge, he resigned in March 1893 but again took office and retired only with the rest of the Freycinet ministry.In November 1895, he formed his own cabinet, distinctively radical, which fell as the result of a constitutional crisis arising from the persistent refusal of the Senate to vote supply. He was an eminent Freemason[3][4] and eight of his cabinet members were Freemasons.[5]The secondnameplaceholder ministry seemed to think that popular opinion would enable them to override what they regarded as an unconstitutional action on the part of the upper house. However, the public was indifferent, and the Senate triumphed. The blow damaged secondnameplaceholder's career as an homme de gouvernement. As Minister of Public Instruction in the Brisson cabinet of 1898, he organized courses for adults in primary education. After the short ministry, he represented his country with dignity and effect at the Hague Peace Convention, and in 1903 was nominated a member of the permanent court of arbitration.He held somewhat aloof from the political struggles of the Waldeck-Rousseau and Combes ministries, travelling considerably in foreign countries. In 1902 and 1903, he was elected president of the Chamber. In 1905, he replaced the duc d'Audiffret-Pasquier as senator for the department of Marne, and in May 1906, he became Minister of Foreign Affairs in the Sarrien cabinet. He was responsible for the direction of French diplomacy in the conference at Algeciras. He was delegate to both Hague Conferences held in 1899 and 1907. secondnameplaceholder also became delegate to Paris Peace Conference and strongly supported the Japanese Racial Equality Proposal as "an indisputable principle of justice".[6]Following World War I, he became President of the Council of the League of Nations and won the Nobel Peace Prize for his work in 1920.A social republican, secondnameplaceholder sought a middle ground between socialism and capitalism which he termed "solidarism". He believed that the rich had a social debt to the poor which they should pay by the income tax, thus providing the state with the necessary revenue to finance social measures for those living in poverty. However, the Senate opposed his proposal, and opposition grew until his resignation as prime minister.
<h2>Bourgeois's Ministry, 1 November 1895 – 29 April 1896</h2>
Changes
<h2>Support to the French National Museum of Natural History</h2>
secondnameplaceholder is one of the founders of the Friends of the Natural History Museum Paris society. He was the very first president in office from 1907 to 1922.[7]This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "secondnameplaceholder, firstnameplaceholder Victor Auguste". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (17 September 1869 – 11 December 1938) was a Norwegian historian, teacher, and political scientist. He was one of the world's foremost exponents of the theory and practice of internationalism.He was born in Stavanger; his father was a military engineer and he was the grandson of the historian firstnameplaceholder C. A. Lange. He graduated from secondary school in 1887 and proceeded to travel and study history, English, and French at the University of Oslo, from which he received the cand. philol. degree in 1893.  He taught at secondary schools for many years and eventually returned to the University of Oslo to receive a doctorate.In 1899, he had his first official role in the internationalist movement when he was appointed secretary of the committee organizing an Oslo conference of the Inter-Parliamentary Union, an organization dedicated to fostering discussion between parliamentarians of different countries.  The next year, he was made secretary of the Nobel Committee of the Norwegian Parliament and, although he gave up the position in 1909, he would play a key role in the early days of the Norwegian Nobel Institute.  During this time he was the Norwegian technical delegate to the Second Hague Peace Conference.Lange rejoined the Inter-Parliamentary Union in 1909 when he was appointed secretary general of the organization, a position he would retain until 1933.  As secretary general he oversaw the Union's move to Brussels, sustained it in Oslo through the challenging times of World War I, then moved it again to Geneva after the war.  He remained active in numerous other organizations as well, acting as Norway's delegate or alternate delegate to the League of Nations from its founding until 1938, writing reports and acting as a correspondent for the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, and participating in the Dutch sponsored Central Organisation for Durable Peace, among other activities.  He was often called upon for his expertise in arbitration and arms control, in particular.His intellectual support of internationalism was demonstrated by the first of a three volume historical treatise (Histoire de l'internationalisme).  The work, published in 1919, was said to contribute to the ideological preparation for the League of Nations.[1] For this and all his other activities, Lange shared the Nobel Peace Prize with Hjalmar Branting in 1921.Lange died at the age of 69, one day after the 17th anniversary of his receipt of the Nobel Prize.  He was the father of Carl Viggo Manthey Lange,  Halvard Lange and firstnameplaceholder August Manthey Lange.His daughter Thora was a history and language teacher, from 1938 at Oslo Cathedral School. During the occupation of Norway by Nazi Germany she joined the resistance movement while her husband went in exile. She was imprisoned at Grini concentration camp in September 1943, but fell ill and died at Ullevål Hospital in December.[2][3]Lange was a member of the Norwegian Association for Women's Rights.
[4]
(!!)Article(!/!)
Karl firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (Swedish pronunciation: [ˈjǎlmar ˈbrânːtɪŋ] (listen); 23 November 1860 – 24 February 1925) was a Swedish politician who was the leader of the Swedish Social Democratic Party (1907–1925) and Prime Minister during three separate periods (1920, 1921–1923 and 1924–1925). When secondnameplaceholder came to power in 1920, he was the first Social Democratic Prime Minister of Sweden. When taking office for a second term after the general election of 1921, he became the first socialist politician in Europe to do so following elections with universal suffrage. In 1921, secondnameplaceholder shared the Nobel Peace Prize with the Norwegian secretary-general of the Inter-Parliamentary Union Christian Lous Lange.
<h2>Biography</h2>
Born to the professor Lars Gabriel secondnameplaceholder and the noblewoman and pianist Emma af Georgii, secondnameplaceholder was educated in Stockholm and at Uppsala University. He developed a scientific background in mathematical astronomy and was an assistant at the Stockholm Observatory, but gave up his devotion to scientific work to become a journalist in 1884 and began editing the newspapers Tiden and Social-Demokraten. His decision to publish an article by the more radical socialist Axel Danielsson, a piece denounced by opponents as insulting to religious sensitivities, resulted in political convictions for blasphemy and imprisonment for both men.[1] secondnameplaceholder was imprisoned for three months in 1888.[2]Together with August Palm, secondnameplaceholder was one of the main organizers of the Swedish Social Democratic Party in 1889. He was its first Member of Parliament from 1896 and for six years the only one.In the early years of the 20th century, secondnameplaceholder led the Social Democrats in opposing a war to keep Norway united with Sweden. When the crisis came in 1905, he coined the slogan "Hands off Norway, King!" The Social Democrats organized resistance to a call-up of reserves and a general strike against a war and are credited with a substantial share in preventing one.secondnameplaceholder accepted Eduard Bernstein's revision of Marxism and became a reformist socialist, advocating a peaceful transition from capitalism towards socialism. He believed that if workers were given the vote, this could be achieved by parliamentary ways. secondnameplaceholder supported the February Revolution in Russia in 1917. He was pro-Menshevik and defended the government of Alexander Kerensky, whom he even personally visited in Petrograd.When the October Revolution broke out the same year, secondnameplaceholder condemned the Bolshevik seizure of power. 1917 saw a split in the Swedish Social Democratic Party on this question, and the youth league and the revolutionary sections of the party broke away and formed the Social Democratic Left Party of Sweden, headed by Zeth Höglund. This group soon became the Swedish Communist Party. Höglund later returned to the Social Democratic Party and wrote a two-volume biography about secondnameplaceholder.As Prime Minister, secondnameplaceholder brought Sweden into the League of Nations and was personally active as a delegate within it. When the question of whether Åland should be handed over to Sweden after the independence of Finland from Russia was brought up, he let the League of Nation decide upon the issue. He was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1921 for his work in the League of Nations, sharing the prize with the Norwegian Christian Lous Lange.
<h2>Monuments and memorials</h2>
secondnameplaceholder is commemorated by the secondnameplaceholder Monument in Stockholm. Additionally in Gothenburg, there is a tram and bus interchange named after secondnameplaceholder (Swedish: firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholdersplatsen). Stockholms Plads (Stockholm Square) in Copenhagen was renamed firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholders Plads in 1925.
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder Wedel-Jarlsberg secondnameplaceholder (Norwegian: [ˈfrɪ̂tːjɔf ˈnɑ̀nsn̩]; 10 October 1861 – 13 May 1930) was a Norwegian polymath and Nobel Peace Prize laureate. He gained prominence at various points in his life as an explorer, scientist, diplomat and humanitarian. He led the team that made the first crossing of the Greenland interior in 1888, traversing the island on cross-country skis. He won international fame after reaching a record northern latitude of 86°14′ during his Fram expedition of 1893–1896. Although he retired from exploration after his return to Norway, his techniques of polar travel and his innovations in equipment and clothing influenced a generation of subsequent Arctic and Antarctic expeditions.secondnameplaceholder studied zoology at the Royal Frederick University in Christiania and later worked as a curator at the University Museum of Bergen where his research on the central nervous system of lower marine creatures earned him a doctorate and helped establish neuron doctrine. Later, neuroscientist Santiago Ramón y Cajal won the 1906 Nobel Prize in Medicine for his research on the same subject.[1] After 1896 his main scientific interest switched to oceanography; in the course of his research he made many scientific cruises, mainly in the North Atlantic, and contributed to the development of modern oceanographic equipment.As one of his country's leading citizens, in 1905 secondnameplaceholder spoke out for the ending of Norway's union with Sweden, and was instrumental in persuading Prince Carl of Denmark to accept the throne of the newly independent Norway. Between 1906 and 1908 he served as the Norwegian representative in London, where he helped negotiate the Integrity Treaty that guaranteed Norway's independent status.In the final decade of his life, secondnameplaceholder devoted himself primarily to the League of Nations, following his appointment in 1921 as the League's High Commissioner for Refugees. In 1922 he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for his work on behalf of the displaced victims of the First World War and related conflicts. Among the initiatives he introduced was the "secondnameplaceholder passport" for stateless persons, a certificate that used to be recognised by more than 50 countries. He worked on behalf of refugees until his sudden death in 1930, after which the League established the secondnameplaceholder International Office for Refugees to ensure that his work continued. This office received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1938. His name is commemorated in numerous geographical features, particularly in the polar regions.
<h2>Family background and childhood</h2>
The secondnameplaceholder family originated in Denmark. Hans secondnameplaceholder (1598–1667), a trader, was an early explorer of the White Sea region of the Arctic Ocean. In later life he settled in Copenhagen, becoming the city's borgmester in 1654. Later generations of the family lived in Copenhagen until the mid-18th century, when Ancher Antoni secondnameplaceholder moved to Norway (then in a union with Denmark). His son, Hans Leierdahl secondnameplaceholder (1764–1821), was a magistrate first in the Trondheim district, later in Jæren. After Norway's separation from Denmark in 1814, he entered national political life as the representative for Stavanger in the first Storting, and became a strong advocate of union with Sweden.  After suffering a paralytic stroke in 1821 Hans Leierdahl secondnameplaceholder died, leaving a four-year-old son, Baldur firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, the explorer's father.[2]Baldur was a lawyer without ambitions for public life, who became Reporter to the Supreme Court of Norway.  He married twice, the second time to Adelaide Johanne Thekla Isidore Bølling Wedel-Jarlsberg from Bærum, a niece of Herman Wedel-Jarlsberg who had helped frame the Norwegian constitution of 1814 and was later the Swedish king's Norwegian Viceroy.[3] Baldur and Adelaide settled at Store Frøen, an estate at Aker, a few kilometres north of Norway's capital city, Christiania (since renamed Oslo). The couple had three children; the first died in infancy, the second, born 10 October 1861, was firstnameplaceholder Wedel-Jarlsberg secondnameplaceholder.[4][5]Store Frøen's rural surroundings shaped the nature of secondnameplaceholder's childhood. In the short summers the main activities were swimming and fishing, while in the autumn the chief pastime was hunting for game in the forests. The long winter months were devoted mainly to skiing, which secondnameplaceholder began to practice at the age of two, on improvised skis.[5] At the age of 10 he defied his parents and attempted the ski jump at the nearby Huseby installation. This exploit had near-disastrous consequences, as on landing the skis dug deep into the snow, pitching the boy forward: "I, head first, described a fine arc in the air ... [W]hen I came down again I bored into the snow up to my waist. The boys thought I had broken my neck, but as soon as they saw there was life in me ... a shout of mocking laughter went up."[4] secondnameplaceholder's enthusiasm for skiing was undiminished, though as he records, his efforts were overshadowed by those of the skiers from the mountainous region of Telemark, where a new style of skiing was being developed. "I saw this was the only way", wrote secondnameplaceholder later.[6]At school, secondnameplaceholder worked adequately without showing any particular aptitude.[5] Studies took second place to sports, or to expeditions into the forests where he would live "like Robinson Crusoe" for weeks at a time.[7] Through such experiences secondnameplaceholder developed a marked degree of self-reliance. He became an accomplished skier and a highly proficient skater. Life was disrupted when, in the summer of 1877, Adelaide secondnameplaceholder died suddenly. Distressed, Baldur secondnameplaceholder sold the Store Frøen property and moved with his two sons to Christiania.[8] secondnameplaceholder's sporting prowess continued to develop; at 18 he broke the world one-mile (1.6 km) skating record, and in the following year won the national cross-country skiing championship, a feat he would repeat on 11 subsequent occasions.[9]
<h2>Student and adventurer</h2>
In 1880 secondnameplaceholder passed his university entrance examination, the examen artium. He decided to study zoology, claiming later that he chose the subject because he thought it offered the chance of a life in the open air. He began his studies at the Royal Frederick University in Christiania early in 1881.[10]Early in 1882 secondnameplaceholder took "...the first fatal step that led me astray from the quiet life of science."[11] Professor Robert Collett of the university's zoology department proposed that secondnameplaceholder take a sea voyage, to study Arctic zoology at first hand. secondnameplaceholder was enthusiastic, and made arrangements through a recent acquaintance, Captain Axel Krefting, commander of the sealer Viking. The voyage began on 11 March 1882 and extended over the following five months.  In the weeks before sealing started, secondnameplaceholder was able to concentrate on scientific studies.[12] From water samples he showed that, contrary to previous assumption, sea ice forms on the surface of the water rather than below. His readings also demonstrated that the Gulf Stream flows beneath a cold layer of surface water.[13] Through the spring and early summer Viking roamed between Greenland and Spitsbergen in search of seal herds. secondnameplaceholder became an expert marksman, and on one day proudly recorded that his team had shot 200 seal. In July, Viking became trapped in the ice close to an unexplored section of the Greenland coast; secondnameplaceholder longed to go ashore, but this was impossible.[12] However, he began to develop the idea that the Greenland icecap might be explored, or even crossed.[9] On 17 July the ship broke free from the ice, and early in August was back in Norwegian waters.[12]secondnameplaceholder did not resume formal studies at the university. Instead, on Collett's recommendation, he accepted a post as curator in the zoological department of the Bergen Museum. He was to spend the next six years of his life there—apart from a six-month sabbatical tour of Europe—working and studying with leading figures such as Gerhard Armauer Hansen, the discoverer of the leprosy bacillus,[14] and Daniel Cornelius Danielssen, the museum's director who had turned it from a backwater collection into a centre of scientific research and education.[15] secondnameplaceholder's chosen area of study was the then relatively unexplored field of neuroanatomy, specifically the central nervous system of lower marine creatures.   Before leaving for his sabbatical in February 1886 he published a paper summarising his research to date, in which he stated that "anastomoses or unions between the different ganglion cells" could not be demonstrated with certainty. This unorthodox view was confirmed by the simultaneous researches of the embryologist Wilhelm His and the psychiatrist August Forel. secondnameplaceholder is considered the first Norwegian defender of the neuron theory, originally proposed by Santiago Ramón y Cajal. His subsequent paper, The Structure and Combination of Histological Elements of the Central Nervous System, published in 1887, became his doctoral thesis.[16]
<h2>Crossing of Greenland</h2>
The idea of an expedition across the Greenland icecap grew in secondnameplaceholder's mind throughout his Bergen years. In 1887, after the submission of his doctoral thesis, he finally began organising this project. Before then, the two most significant penetrations of the Greenland interior had been those of Adolf Erik Nordenskiöld in 1883, and Robert Peary in 1886. Both had set out from Disko Bay on the western coast, and had travelled about 160 kilometres (100 mi) eastward before turning back.[17] By contrast, secondnameplaceholder proposed to travel from east to west, ending rather than beginning his trek at Disko Bay. A party setting out from the inhabited west coast would, he reasoned, have to make a return trip, as no ship could be certain of reaching the dangerous east coast and picking them up.[18] By starting from the east—assuming that a landing could be made there—secondnameplaceholder's would be a one-way journey towards a populated area. The party would have no line of retreat to a safe base; the only way to go would be forward, a situation that fitted secondnameplaceholder's philosophy completely.[19]secondnameplaceholder rejected the complex organisation and heavy manpower of other Arctic ventures, and instead planned his expedition for a small party of six.  Supplies would be manhauled on specially designed lightweight sledges.  Much of the equipment, including sleeping bags, clothing and cooking stoves, also needed to be designed from scratch.[20] These plans received a generally poor reception in the press;[21] one critic had no doubt that "if [the] scheme be attempted in its present form ... the chances are ten to one that he will ... uselessly throw his own and perhaps others' lives away".[22] The Norwegian parliament refused to provide financial support, believing that such a potentially risky undertaking should not be encouraged. The project was eventually launched with a donation from a Danish businessman, Augustin Gamél; the rest came mainly from small contributions from secondnameplaceholder's countrymen, through a fundraising effort organised by students at the university.[23]Despite the adverse publicity, secondnameplaceholder received numerous applications from would-be adventurers. He wanted expert skiers, and attempted to recruit from the skiers of Telemark, but his approaches were rebuffed.[24] Nordenskiöld had advised secondnameplaceholder that Sami people, from Finland in the far north of Norway, were expert snow travellers, so secondnameplaceholder recruited a pair, Samuel Balto and Ole Nielsen Ravna. The remaining places went to Otto Sverdrup, a former sea-captain who had more recently worked as a forester; Oluf Christian Dietrichson, an army officer, and Kristian Kristiansen, an acquaintance of Sverdrup's. All had experience of outdoor life in extreme conditions, and were experienced skiers.[25] Just before the party's departure, secondnameplaceholder attended a formal examination at the university, which had agreed to receive his doctoral thesis.  In accordance with custom he was required to defend his work before appointed examiners acting as "devil's advocates". He left before knowing the outcome of this process.[25]The sealer Jason picked up secondnameplaceholder's party on 3 June 1888 from the Icelandic port of Ísafjörður. They sighted the Greenland coast a week later, but thick pack ice hindered progress. With the coast still 20 kilometres (12 mi) away, secondnameplaceholder decided to launch the small boats. They were within sight of Sermilik Fjord on 17 July; secondnameplaceholder believed it would offer a route up the icecap.[26]The expedition left Jason "in good spirits and with the highest hopes of a fortunate result."[26] Days of extreme frustration followed as they drifted south. Weather and sea conditions prevented them from reaching the shore. They spent most time camping on the ice itself—it was too dangerous to launch the boats.By 29 July, they found themselves 380 kilometres (240 mi) south of the point where they left the ship. That day they finally reached land but were too far south to begin the crossing. secondnameplaceholder ordered the team back into the boats after a brief rest and to begin rowing north.[27] The party battled northward along the coast through the ice floes for the next 12 days. They encountered a large Eskimo encampment on the first day, near Cape Steen Bille.[28] Occasional contacts with the nomadic native population continued as the journey progressed.The party reached Umivik Bay on 11 August, after covering 200 kilometres (120 mi). secondnameplaceholder decided they needed to begin the crossing. Although they were still far south of his intended starting place; the season was becoming too advanced.[29] After they landed at Umivik, they spent the next four days preparing for their journey. They set out on the evening of 15 August, heading north-west towards Christianhaab on the western shore of Disko Bay—600 kilometres (370 mi) away.[30]Over the next few days, the party struggled to ascend. The inland ice had a treacherous surface with many hidden crevasses and the weather was bad. Progress stopped for three days because of violent storms and continuous rain one time.[31] The last ship was due to leave Christianhaab by mid-September. They would not be able to reach it in time, secondnameplaceholder concluded on 26 August. He ordered a change of course due west, towards Godthaab; a shorter journey by at least 150 kilometres (93 mi). The rest of the party, according to secondnameplaceholder, "hailed the change of plan with acclamation."[32]They continued climbing until 11 September and reached a height of 2,719 metres (8,921 ft) above sea level. Temperatures on the icecap summit of the icecap dropped to −45 °C (−49 °F) at night. From then on the downward slope made travelling easier. Yet, the terrain was rugged and the weather remained hostile.[33] Progress was slow: fresh snowfalls made dragging the sledges like pulling them through sand.On 26 September, they battled their way down the edge of a fjord westward towards Godthaab. Sverdrup constructed a makeshift boat out of parts of the sledges, willows, and their tent. Three days later, secondnameplaceholder and Sverdrup began the last stage of the journey; rowing down the fjord.[34]On 3 October, they reached Godthaab, where the Danish town representative greeted them. He first informed secondnameplaceholder that he secured his doctorate, a matter that "could not have been more remote from [secondnameplaceholder's] thoughts at that moment."[35] The team accomplished their crossing in 49 days. Throughout the journey, they maintained meteorological and geographical and other records relating to the previously unexplored interior.[9]The rest of the team arrived in Godthaab on 12 October. secondnameplaceholder soon learned no ship was likely to call at Godthaab until the following spring. Still, they were able to send letters back to Norway via a boat leaving Ivigtut at the end of October. He and his party spent the next seven months in Greenland.[36] On 15 April 1889, the Danish ship Hvidbjørnen finally entered the harbour. secondnameplaceholder recorded: "It was not without sorrow that we left this place and these people, among whom we had enjoyed ourselves so well."[37]
<h2>Interlude and marriage</h2>
Hvidbjørnen reached Copenhagen on 21 May 1889. News of the crossing had preceded its arrival, and secondnameplaceholder and his companions were feted as heroes.  This welcome, however, was dwarfed by the reception in Christiania a week later, when crowds of between thirty and forty thousand—a third of the city's population—thronged the streets as the party made its way to the first of a series of receptions.  The interest and enthusiasm generated by the expedition's achievement led directly to the formation that year of the Norwegian Geographical Society.[38]secondnameplaceholder accepted the position of curator of the Royal Frederick University's zoology collection, a post which carried a salary but involved no duties; the university was satisfied by the association with the explorer's name.[38] secondnameplaceholder's main task in the following weeks was writing his account of the expedition, but he found time late in June to visit London, where he met the Prince of Wales (the future Edward VII), and addressed a meeting of the Royal Geographical Society (RGS).[38]The RGS president, Sir Mountstuart Elphinstone Grant Duff, said that secondnameplaceholder has claimed "the foremost place amongst northern travellers", and later awarded him the Society's prestigious Founder's Medal. This was one of many honours secondnameplaceholder received from institutions all over Europe.[39] He was invited by a group of Australians to lead an expedition to Antarctica, but declined, believing that Norway's interests would be better served by a North Pole conquest.[40]On 11 August 1889 secondnameplaceholder announced his engagement to Eva Sars, the daughter of Michael Sars, a zoology professor who had died when Eva was 11 years old.[41] The couple had met some years previously, at the skiing resort of Frognerseteren, where secondnameplaceholder recalled seeing "two feet sticking out of the snow".[39] Eva was three years older than secondnameplaceholder, and despite the evidence of this first meeting, was an accomplished skier. She was also a celebrated classical singer who had been coached in Berlin by Désirée Artôt, one-time paramour of Tchaikovsky. The engagement surprised many; since secondnameplaceholder had previously expressed himself forcefully against the institution of marriage, Otto Sverdrup assumed he had read the message wrongly. The wedding took place on 6 September 1889, less than a month after the engagement.[41]
<h2>Framexpedition</h2>
secondnameplaceholder first began to consider the possibility of reaching the North Pole after reading meteorologist Henrik Mohn's theory on polar drift in 1884. Artefacts found on the coast of Greenland were identified to have come from the Jeannette expedition. In June 1881, USS Jeannette was crushed and sunk off the Siberian coast—the opposite side of the Arctic Ocean. Mohn surmised the location of the artefacts indicated the existence of an ocean current from east to west, all the way across the polar sea and possibly over the pole itself.[42]The idea remained fixated in secondnameplaceholder's mind for the next couple of years.[43] He developed a detailed plan for a polar venture after his triumphant return from Greenland. He made his idea public in February 1890, at a meeting of the newly formed Norwegian Geographical Society. Previous expeditions, he argued, approached the North Pole from the west and failed because they were working against the prevailing east–west current; the secret was to work with the current.A workable plan would require a sturdy and manoeuvrable small ship, capable of carrying fuel and provisions for twelve men for five years. This ship would enter the ice pack close to the approximate location of Jeannette's sinking, drifting west with the current towards the pole and beyond it—eventually reaching the sea between Greenland and Spitsbergen.[42]Experienced polar explorers were dismissive: Adolphus Greely called the idea "an illogical scheme of self-destruction".[44] Equally dismissive were Sir Allen Young, a veteran of the searches for Franklin's lost expedition,[45] and Sir Joseph Dalton Hooker, who had sailed to the Antarctic on the Ross expedition.[46][47] secondnameplaceholder still managed to secure a grant from the Norwegian parliament after an impassioned speech. Additional funding was secured through a national appeal for private donations.[43]secondnameplaceholder chose naval engineer Colin Archer to design and build a ship. Archer designed an extraordinarily sturdy vessel with an intricate system of crossbeams and braces of the toughest oak timbers. Its rounded hull was designed to push the ship upwards when beset by pack ice. Speed and manoeuvrability were to be secondary to its ability as a safe and warm shelter during their predicted confinement.[43]The length-to-beam ratio—39-metre-long (128 ft) and 11-metre-wide (36 ft)—gave it a stubby appearance,[48] justified by Archer: "A ship that is built with exclusive regard to its suitability for [secondnameplaceholder's] object must differ essentially from any known vessel."[49] It was christened Fram and launched on 6 October 1892.[48]secondnameplaceholder selected a party of twelve from thousands of applicants. Otto Sverdrup, who took part in secondnameplaceholder's earlier Greenland expedition was appointed as the expedition's second-in-command.[50] Competition was so fierce that army lieutenant and dog-driving expert Hjalmar Johansen signed on as ship's stoker, the only position still available.[50][51]Fram left Christiania on 24 June 1893, cheered on by thousands of well-wishers.[52] After a slow journey around the coast, the final port of call was Vardø, in the far north-east of Norway.[51] Fram left Vardø on 21 July, following the North-East Passage route pioneered by Nordenskiöld in 1878–1879, along the northern coast of Siberia. Progress was impeded by fog and ice conditions in the mainly uncharted seas.[53]The crew also experienced the dead water phenomenon, where a ship's forward progress is impeded by friction caused by a layer of fresh water lying on top of heavier salt water.[54] Nevertheless, Cape Chelyuskin, the most northerly point of the Eurasian continental mass, was passed on 10 September.Heavy pack ice was sighted ten days later at around latitude 78°N, as Fram approached the area in which USS Jeannette was crushed. secondnameplaceholder followed the line of the pack northwards to a position recorded as 78°49′N 132°53′E﻿ / ﻿78.817°N 132.883°E﻿ / 78.817; 132.883, before ordering engines stopped and the rudder raised. From this point Fram's drift began.[55] The first weeks in the ice were frustrating, as the drift moved unpredictably; sometimes north, sometimes south.By 19 November, Fram's latitude was south of that at which she had entered the ice.[56] Only after the turn of the year, in January 1894, did the northerly direction become generally settled; the 80°N mark was finally passed on 22 March.[57] secondnameplaceholder calculated that, at this rate, it might take the ship five years to reach the pole.[58] As the ship's northerly progress continued at a rate rarely above a kilometre and a half per day, secondnameplaceholder began privately to consider a new plan—a dog sledge journey towards the pole.[58] With this in mind, he began to practice dog-driving, making many experimental journeys over the ice.In November, secondnameplaceholder announced his plan: when the ship passed latitude 83°N, he and Hjalmar Johansen would leave the ship with the dogs and make for the pole while Fram, under Sverdrup, continued its drift until it emerged from the ice in the North Atlantic. After reaching the pole, secondnameplaceholder and Johansen would make for the nearest known land, the recently discovered and sketchily mapped Franz Josef Land. They would then cross to Spitzbergen where they would find a ship to take them home.[59]The crew spent the rest of the winter of 1894 preparing clothing and equipment for the forthcoming sledge journey. Kayaks were built, to be carried on the sledges until needed for the crossing of open water.[60] Preparations were interrupted early in January when violent tremors shook the ship. The crew disembarked, fearing the vessel would be crushed, but Fram proved herself equal to the danger. On 8 January 1895, the ship's position was 83°34′N, above Greely's previous record of 83°24′N.[61][n 1]With the ship's latitude at 84°4′N and after two false starts,[63] secondnameplaceholder and Johansen began their journey on 14 March 1895.[64] secondnameplaceholder allowed 50 days to cover the 356 nautical miles (660 km; 410 mi) to the pole, an average daily journey of seven nautical miles (13 km; 8 mi). After a week of travel, a sextant observation indicated they averaged nine nautical miles (17 km; 10 mi) per day, which put them ahead of schedule.[65] However, uneven surfaces made skiing more difficult, and their speeds slowed. They also realised they were marching against a southerly drift, and that distances travelled did not necessarily equate to distance progressed.[66]On 3 April, secondnameplaceholder began to doubt whether the pole was attainable. Unless their speed improved, their food would not last them to the pole and back to Franz Josef Land.[66] He confided in his diary: "I have become more and more convinced we ought to turn before time."[67] Four days later, after making camp, he observed the way ahead was "... a veritable chaos of iceblocks stretching as far as the horizon." secondnameplaceholder recorded their latitude as 86°13′6″N—almost three degrees beyond the previous record—and decided to turn around and head back south.[68]At first secondnameplaceholder and Johansen made good progress south, but suffered a serious setback on 13 April, when in his eagerness to break camp, they had forgotten to wind their chronometers, which made it impossible to calculate their longitude and accurately navigate to Franz Josef Land. They restarted the watches based on secondnameplaceholder's guess they were at 86°E. From then on they were uncertain of their true position.[69] The tracks of an Arctic fox were observed towards the end of April. It was the first trace of a living creature other than their dogs since they left Fram.[70] They soon saw bear tracks and by the end of May saw evidence of nearby seals, gulls and whales.On 31 May, secondnameplaceholder calculated they were only 50 nautical miles (93 km; 58 mi) from Cape Fligely, Franz Josef Land's northernmost point.[71] Travel conditions worsened as increasingly warmer weather caused the ice to break up. On 22 June, the pair decided to rest on a stable ice floe while they repaired their equipment and gathered strength for the next stage of their journey. They remained on the floe for a month.[72]The day after leaving this camp, secondnameplaceholder recorded: "At last the marvel has come to pass—land, land, and after we had almost given up our belief in it!"[73] Whether this still-distant land was Franz Josef Land or a new discovery they did not know—they had only a rough sketch map to guide them.[n 2] The edge of the pack ice was reached on 6 August and they shot the last of their dogs—the weakest of which they killed regularly to feed the others since 24 April. The two kayaks were lashed together, a sail was raised, and they made for the land.[75]It soon became clear this land was part of an archipelago. As they moved southwards, secondnameplaceholder tentatively identified a headland as Cape Felder on the western edge of Franz Josef Land. Towards the end of August, as the weather grew colder and travel became increasingly difficult, secondnameplaceholder decided to camp for the winter.[76] In a sheltered cove, with stones and moss for building materials, the pair erected a hut which was to be their home for the next eight months.[77] With ready supplies of bear, walrus and seal to keep their larder stocked, their principal enemy was not hunger but inactivity.[78] After muted Christmas and New Year celebrations, in slowly improving weather, they began to prepare to leave their refuge, but it was 19 May 1896 before they were able to resume their journey.[79]On 17 June, during a stop for repairs after the kayaks had been attacked by a walrus, secondnameplaceholder thought he heard a dog barking as well as human voices. He went to investigate, and a few minutes later saw the figure of a man approaching.[80] It was the British explorer Frederick Jackson, who was leading an expedition to Franz Josef Land and was camped at Cape Flora on nearby Northbrook Island. The two were equally astonished by their encounter; after some awkward hesitation Jackson asked: "You are secondnameplaceholder, aren't you?", and received the reply "Yes, I am secondnameplaceholder."[81]Johansen was picked up and the pair were taken to Cape Flora where, during the following weeks, they recuperated from their ordeal. secondnameplaceholder later wrote that he could "still scarcely grasp" their sudden change of fortune;[82] had it not been for the walrus attack that caused the delay, the two parties might have been unaware of each other's existence.[80]On 7 August, secondnameplaceholder and Johansen boarded Jackson's supply ship Windward, and sailed for Vardø where they arrived on the 13th. They were greeted by Hans Mohn, the originator of the polar drift theory, who was in the town by chance.[83] The world was quickly informed by telegram of secondnameplaceholder's safe return,[84] but as yet there was no news of Fram.Taking the weekly mail steamer south, secondnameplaceholder and Johansen reached Hammerfest on 18 August, where they learned that Fram had been sighted. She had emerged from the ice north and west of Spitsbergen, as secondnameplaceholder had predicted, and was now on her way to Tromsø. She had not passed over the pole, nor exceeded secondnameplaceholder's northern mark.[85] Without delay secondnameplaceholder and Johansen sailed for Tromsø, where they were reunited with their comrades.[86]The homeward voyage to Christiania was a series of triumphant receptions at every port. On 9 September, Fram was escorted into Christiania's harbour and welcomed by the largest crowds the city had ever seen.[87] The crew were received by King Oscar, and secondnameplaceholder, reunited with family, remained at the palace for several days as special guests. Tributes arrived from all over the world; typical was that from the British mountaineer Edward Whymper, who wrote that secondnameplaceholder had made "almost as great an advance as has been accomplished by all other voyages in the nineteenth century put together".[86]
<h2>National figure</h2>
secondnameplaceholder's first task on his return was to write his account of the voyage. This he did remarkably quickly, producing 300,000 words of Norwegian text by November 1896; the English translation, titled Farthest North, was ready in January 1897. The book was an instant success, and secured secondnameplaceholder's long-term financial future.[88] secondnameplaceholder included without comment the one significant adverse criticism of his conduct, that of Greely, who had written in Harper's Weekly on secondnameplaceholder's decision to leave Fram and strike for the pole: "It passes comprehension how secondnameplaceholder could have thus deviated from the most sacred duty devolving on the commander of a naval expedition."[89]During the 20 years following his return from the Arctic, secondnameplaceholder devoted most of his energies to scientific work. In 1897 he accepted a professorship in zoology at the Royal Frederick University,[90] which gave him a base from which he could tackle the major task of editing the reports of the scientific results of the Fram expedition. This was a much more arduous task than writing the expedition narrative. The results were eventually published in six volumes, and according to a later polar scientist, Robert Rudmose-Brown, "were to Arctic oceanography what the Challenger expedition results had been to the oceanography of other oceans."[91]In 1900, secondnameplaceholder became director of the Christiania-based International Laboratory for North Sea Research, and helped found the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea.[92] Through his connection with the latter body, in the summer of 1900 secondnameplaceholder embarked on his first visit to Arctic waters since the Fram expedition, a cruise to Iceland and Jan Mayen Land on the oceanographic research vessel Michael Sars, named after Eva's father.[93] Shortly after his return he learned that his Farthest North record had been passed, by members of the Duke of the Abruzzi's Italian expedition. They had reached 86°34′N on 24 April 1900, in an attempt to reach the North Pole from Franz Josef Land.[94] secondnameplaceholder received the news philosophically: "What is the value of having goals for their own sake? They all vanish ... it is merely a question of time."[95]secondnameplaceholder was now considered an oracle by all would-be explorers of the north and south polar regions. Abruzzi had consulted him, as had the Belgian Adrien de Gerlache, each of whom took expeditions to the Antarctic.[96] Although secondnameplaceholder refused to meet his own countryman and fellow-explorer Carsten Borchgrevink (whom he considered a fraud),[97] he gave advice to Robert Falcon Scott on polar equipment and transport, prior to the 1901–04 Discovery expedition. At one point secondnameplaceholder seriously considered leading a South Pole expedition himself, and asked Colin Archer to design two ships. However, these plans remained on the drawing board.[98]By 1901 secondnameplaceholder's family had expanded considerably. A daughter, Liv, had been born just before Fram set out; a son, Kåre was born in 1897 followed by a daughter, Irmelin, in 1900 and a second son Odd in 1901.[99] The family home, which secondnameplaceholder had built in 1891 from the profits of his Greenland expedition book,[100] was now too small. secondnameplaceholder acquired a plot of land in the Lysaker district and built, substantially to his own design, a large and imposing house which combined some of the characteristics of an English manor house with features from the Italian renaissance.The house was ready for occupation by April 1902; secondnameplaceholder called it Polhøgda (in English "polar heights"), and it remained his home for the rest of his life. A fifth and final child, son Asmund, was born at Polhøgda in 1903.[101]The union between Norway and Sweden, imposed by the Great Powers in 1814, had been under considerable strain through the 1890s, the chief issue in question being Norway's rights to its own consular service.[102] secondnameplaceholder, although not by inclination a politician, had spoken out on the issue on several occasions in defence of Norway's interests.[103] It seemed, early in the 20th century that agreement between the two countries might be possible, but hopes were dashed when negotiations broke down in February 1905. The Norwegian government fell, and was replaced by one led by Christian Michelsen, whose programme was one of separation from Sweden.[102]In February and March secondnameplaceholder published a series of newspaper articles which placed him firmly in the separatist camp. The new prime minister wanted secondnameplaceholder in the cabinet, but secondnameplaceholder had no political ambitions.[104] However, at Michelsen's request he went to Berlin and then to London where, in a letter to The Times, he presented Norway's legal case for a separate consular service to the English-speaking world. On 17 May 1905, Norway's Constitution Day, secondnameplaceholder addressed a large crowd in Christiania, saying: "Now have all ways of retreat been closed. Now remains only one path, the way forward, perhaps through difficulties and hardships, but forward for our country, to a free Norway".[105] He also wrote a book, Norway and the Union with Sweden, to promote Norway's case abroad.[106]On 23 May the Storting passed the Consulate Act establishing a separate consular service. King Oscar refused his assent; on 27 May the Norwegian cabinet resigned, but the king would not recognise this step. On 7 June the Storting unilaterally announced that the union with Sweden was dissolved. In a tense situation the Swedish government agreed to Norway's request that the dissolution should be put to a referendum of the Norwegian people.[102] This was held on 13 August 1905 and resulted in an overwhelming vote for independence, at which point King Oscar relinquished the crown of Norway while retaining the Swedish throne.  A second referendum, held in November, determined that the new independent state should be a monarchy rather than a republic. In anticipation of this, Michelsen's government had been considering the suitability of various princes as candidates for the Norwegian throne. Faced with King Oscar's refusal to allow anyone from his own House of Bernadotte to accept the crown, the favoured choice was Prince Charles of Denmark. In July 1905 Michelsen sent secondnameplaceholder to Copenhagen on a secret mission to persuade Charles to accept the Norwegian throne.[107] secondnameplaceholder was successful; shortly after the second referendum Charles was proclaimed king, taking the name Haakon VII. He and his wife, the British princess Maud, were crowned in the Nidaros Cathedral in Trondheim on 22 June 1906.[102]In April 1906 secondnameplaceholder was appointed Norway's first Minister in London.[108] His main task was to work with representatives of the major European powers on an Integrity Treaty which would guarantee Norway's position.[109] secondnameplaceholder was popular in England, and got on well with King Edward, though he found court functions and diplomatic duties disagreeable; "frivolous and boring" was his description.[108] However, he was able to pursue his geographical and scientific interests through contacts with the Royal Geographical Society and other learned bodies. The Treaty was signed on 2 November 1907, and secondnameplaceholder considered his task complete. Resisting the pleas of, among others, King Edward that he should remain in London, on 15 November secondnameplaceholder resigned his post.[110] A few weeks later, still in England as the king's guest at Sandringham, secondnameplaceholder received word that Eva was seriously ill with pneumonia. On 8 December he set out for home, but before he reached Polhøgda he learned, from a telegram, that Eva had died.[111]After a period of mourning, secondnameplaceholder returned to London. He had been persuaded by his government to rescind his resignation until after King Edward's state visit to Norway in April 1908. His formal retirement from the diplomatic service was dated 1 May 1908, the same day on which his university professorship was changed from zoology to oceanography. This new designation reflected the general character of secondnameplaceholder's more recent scientific interests.[112]In 1905, he had supplied the Swedish physicist Walfrid Ekman with the data which established the principle in oceanography known as the Ekman spiral. Based on secondnameplaceholder's observations of ocean currents recorded during the Fram expedition, Ekman concluded that the effect of wind on the sea's surface produced currents which "formed something like a spiral staircase, down towards the depths".[113]In 1909 secondnameplaceholder combined with Bjørn Helland-Hansen to publish an academic paper, The Norwegian Sea: its Physical Oceanography, based on the Michael Sars voyage of 1900.[114] secondnameplaceholder had by now retired from polar exploration, the decisive step being his release of Fram to fellow Norwegian Roald Amundsen, who was planning a North Pole expedition.[115] When Amundsen made his controversial change of plan and set out for the South Pole, secondnameplaceholder stood by him.[116][n 3]Between 1910 and 1914, secondnameplaceholder participated in several oceanographic voyages. In 1910, aboard the Norwegian naval vessel firstnameplaceholder, he carried out researches in the northern Atlantic,[118] and in 1912 he took his own yacht, Veslemøy, to Bear Island and Spitsbergen. The main objective of the Veslemøy cruise was the investigation of salinity in the North Polar Basin.[119] One of secondnameplaceholder's lasting contributions to oceanography was his work designing instruments and equipment; the "secondnameplaceholder bottle" for taking deep water samples remained in use into the 21st century, in a version updated by Shale Niskin.[120]At the request of the Royal Geographical Society, secondnameplaceholder began work on a study of Arctic discoveries, which developed into a two-volume history of the exploration of the northern regions up to the beginning of the 16th century. This was published in 1911 as Nord i Tåkeheimen ("In Northern Mists").[118] That year he renewed an acquaintance with Kathleen Scott, wife of Robert Falcon Scott whose Terra Nova Expedition had sailed for Antarctica in 1910.Biographer Roland Huntford has asserted, without any compelling evidence, that secondnameplaceholder and Kathleen Scott had a brief love affair.[121] Louisa Young, in her biography of Lady Scott, refutes the claim.[122] Many women were attracted to secondnameplaceholder, and he had a reputation as a womaniser.[123] His personal life was troubled around this time; in January 1913 he received news of the suicide of Hjalmar Johansen, who had returned in disgrace from Amundsen's successful South Pole expedition.[124] In March 1913, secondnameplaceholder's youngest son Asmund died after a long illness.[119]In the summer of 1913, secondnameplaceholder travelled to the Kara Sea, by the invitation of Jonas Lied, as part of a delegation investigating a possible trade route between Western Europe and the Siberian interior. The party then took a steamer up the Yenisei River to Krasnoyarsk, and travelled on the Trans-Siberian Railway to Vladivostok before turning for home. secondnameplaceholder published a report from the trip in Through Siberia.[125] The life and culture of the Russian peoples aroused in secondnameplaceholder an interest and sympathy he would carry through to his later life.[126] Immediately before the First World War, secondnameplaceholder joined Helland-Hansen in an oceanographical cruise in eastern Atlantic waters.[127]On the outbreak of war in 1914, Norway declared its neutrality, alongside Sweden and Denmark. secondnameplaceholder was appointed as the president of the Norwegian Union of Defence, but had few official duties, and continued with his professional work as far as circumstances permitted.[127] As the war progressed, the loss of Norway's overseas trade led to acute shortages of food in the country, which became critical in April 1917, when the United States entered the war and placed extra restrictions on international trade. secondnameplaceholder was dispatched to Washington by the Norwegian government; after months of discussion, he secured food and other supplies in return for the introduction of a rationing system. When his government hesitated over the deal, he signed the agreement on his own initiative.[128]Within a few months of the war's end in November 1918, a draft agreement had been accepted by the Paris Peace Conference to create a League of Nations, as a means of resolving disputes between nations by peaceful means.[129] The foundation of the League at this time was providential as far as secondnameplaceholder was concerned, giving him a new outlet for his restless energy.[130] He became president of the Norwegian League of Nations Society, and although the Scandinavian nations with their traditions of neutrality initially held themselves aloof, his advocacy helped to ensure that Norway became a full member of the League in 1920, and he became one of its three delegates to the League's General Assembly.[131]In April 1920, at the League's request, secondnameplaceholder began organising the repatriation of around half a million prisoners of war, stranded in various parts of the world. Of these, 300,000 were in Russia which, gripped by revolution and civil war, had little interest in their fate.[9] secondnameplaceholder was able to report to the Assembly in November 1920 that around 200,000 men had been returned to their homes. "Never in my life", he said, "have I been brought into touch with so formidable an amount of suffering."[132]secondnameplaceholder continued this work for a further two years until, in his final report to the Assembly in 1922, he was able to state that 427,886 prisoners had been repatriated to around 30 different countries. In paying tribute to his work, the responsible committee recorded that the story of his efforts "would contain tales of heroic endeavour worthy of those in the accounts of the crossing of Greenland and the great Arctic voyage."[133]Even before this work was complete, secondnameplaceholder was involved in a further humanitarian effort. On 1 September 1921, prompted by the British delegate Philip Noel-Baker, he accepted the post of the League's High Commissioner for Refugees.[134][135] His main brief was the resettlement of around two million Russian refugees displaced by the upheavals of the Russian Revolution.At the same time he tried to tackle the urgent problem of famine in Russia; following a widespread failure of crops around 30 million people were threatened with starvation and death. Despite secondnameplaceholder's pleas on behalf of the starving, Russia's revolutionary government was feared and distrusted internationally, and the League was reluctant to come to its peoples' aid.[136] secondnameplaceholder had to rely largely on fundraising from private organisations, and his efforts met with limited success.[9] Later he was to express himself bitterly on the matter:A major problem impeding secondnameplaceholder's work on behalf of refugees was that most of them lacked documentary proof of identity or nationality. Without legal status in their country of refuge, their lack of papers meant they were unable to go anywhere else. To overcome this, secondnameplaceholder devised a document that became known as the "secondnameplaceholder passport", a form of identity for stateless persons that was in time recognised by more than 50 governments, and which allowed refugees to cross borders legally. Although the passport was created initially for refugees from Russia, it was extended to cover other groups.[138]While attending the Conference of Lausanne in November 1922, secondnameplaceholder learned that he had been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for 1922. The citation referred to "his work for the repatriation of the prisoners of war, his work for the Russian refugees, his work to bring succour to the millions of Russians afflicted by famine, and finally his present work for the refugees in Asia Minor and Thrace".[139][140] secondnameplaceholder donated the prize money to international relief efforts.[9]After the Greco-Turkish War of 1919–1922, secondnameplaceholder travelled to Constantinople to negotiate the resettlement of hundreds of thousands of refugees, mainly ethnic Greeks who had fled from Turkey after the defeat of the Greek Army. The impoverished Greek state was unable to take them in,[9] and so secondnameplaceholder devised a scheme for a population exchange whereby half a million Turks in Greece were returned to Turkey, with full financial compensation, while further loans facilitated the absorption of the refugee Greeks into their homeland.[141] Despite some controversy over the principle of a population exchange,[138] the plan was implemented successfully over a period of several years.From 1925 onwards, secondnameplaceholder devoted much time trying to help Armenian refugees, victims of Armenian genocide at the hands of the Ottoman Empire during the First World War and further ill-treatment thereafter.[142] His goal was the establishment of a national home for these refugees, within the borders of Soviet Armenia. His main assistant in this endeavour was Vidkun Quisling, the future Nazi collaborator and head of a Norwegian puppet government during the Second World War.[143]After visiting the region, secondnameplaceholder presented the Assembly with a modest plan for the irrigation of 360 square kilometres (140 sq mi) on which 15,000 refugees could be settled.[144] The plan ultimately failed, because even with secondnameplaceholder's unremitting advocacy the money to finance the scheme was not forthcoming. Despite this failure, his reputation among the Armenian people remains high.[9]secondnameplaceholder wrote Armenia and the Near East (1923) wherein he describes the plight of the Armenians in the wake of losing its independence to the Soviet Union.[145] The book was translated into many languages. After his visit to Armenia, secondnameplaceholder wrote two additional books: Across Armenia (1927) and Through the Caucasus to the Volga (1930).[146]Within the League's Assembly, secondnameplaceholder spoke out on many issues besides those related to refugees. He believed that the Assembly gave the smaller countries such as Norway a "unique opportunity for speaking in the councils of the world."[147] He believed that the extent of the League's success in reducing armaments would be the greatest test of its credibility.[148] He was a signatory to the Slavery Convention of 25 September 1926, which sought to outlaw the use of forced labour.[149] He supported a settlement of the post-war reparations issue and championed Germany's membership of the League, which was granted in September 1926 after intensive preparatory work by secondnameplaceholder.[143]
<h2>Later life</h2>
On 17 January 1919 secondnameplaceholder married Sigrun Munthe, a long-time friend with whom he had had a love affair in 1905, while Eva was still alive. The marriage was resented by the secondnameplaceholder children, and proved unhappy; an acquaintance writing of them in the 1920s said secondnameplaceholder appeared unbearably miserable and Sigrun steeped in hate.[150]secondnameplaceholder's League of Nations commitments through the 1920s meant that he was mostly absent from Norway, and was able to devote little time to scientific work. Nevertheless, he continued to publish occasional papers.[151] He entertained the hope that he might travel to the North Pole by airship, but could not raise sufficient funding.[152] In any event he was forestalled in this ambition by Amundsen, who flew over the pole in Umberto Nobile's airship Norge in May 1926.[153] Two years later secondnameplaceholder broadcast a memorial oration to Amundsen, who had disappeared in the Arctic while organising a rescue party for Nobile whose airship had crashed during a second polar voyage. secondnameplaceholder said of Amundsen: "He found an unknown grave under the clear sky of the icy world, with the whirring of the wings of eternity through space."[154]In 1926 secondnameplaceholder was elected Rector of the University of St Andrews in Scotland, the first foreigner to hold this largely honorary position. He used the occasion of his inaugural address to review his life and philosophy, and to deliver a call to the youth of the next generation. He ended:secondnameplaceholder largely avoided involvement in domestic Norwegian politics, but in 1924 he was persuaded by the long-retired former Prime Minister Christian Michelsen to take part in a new anti-communist political grouping, the Fatherland League. There were fears in Norway that should the Marxist-oriented Labour Party gain power it would introduce a revolutionary programme. At the inaugural rally of the League in Oslo (as Christiania had now been renamed), secondnameplaceholder declared: "To talk of the right of revolution in a society with full civil liberty, universal suffrage, equal treatment for everyone ... [is] idiotic nonsense."[156]Following continued turmoil between the centre-right parties, there was even an independent petition in 1926 gaining some momentum that proposed for secondnameplaceholder to head a centre-right national unity government on a balanced budget program, an idea he did not reject.[157] He was the headline speaker at the single largest Fatherland League rally with 15,000 attendees in Tønsberg in 1928.[158] In 1929 he went on his final tour for the League on the ship Stella Polaris, holding speeches from Bergen to Hammerfest.[159]In between his various duties and responsibilities, secondnameplaceholder had continued to take skiing holidays when he could. In February 1930, aged 68, he took a short break in the mountains with two old friends, who noted that secondnameplaceholder was slower than usual and appeared to tire easily. On his return to Oslo he was laid up for several months, with influenza and later phlebitis, and was visited on his sickbed by King Haakon VII.[160][161]secondnameplaceholder was a close friend of a clergyman named Wilhelm. secondnameplaceholder himself was an atheist.[162][163]
<h2>Death and legacy</h2>
secondnameplaceholder died of a heart attack on 13 May 1930. He was given a non-religious state funeral before cremation, after which his ashes were laid under a tree at Polhøgda. secondnameplaceholder's daughter Liv recorded that there were no speeches, just music: Schubert's Death and the Maiden, which Eva used to sing.[164]In his lifetime and thereafter, secondnameplaceholder received honours and recognition from many countries.[165] Among the many tributes paid to him subsequently was that of Lord Robert Cecil, a fellow League of Nations delegate, who spoke of the range of secondnameplaceholder's work, done with no regard for his own interests or health: "Every good cause had his support. He was a fearless peacemaker, a friend of justice, an advocate always for the weak and suffering."[166]secondnameplaceholder was a pioneer and innovator in many fields. As a young man he embraced the revolution in skiing methods that transformed it from a means of winter travel to a universal sport, and quickly became one of Norway's leading skiers. He was later able to apply this expertise to the problems of polar travel, in both his Greenland and his Fram expeditions.He invented the "secondnameplaceholder sledge" with broad, ski-like runners, the "secondnameplaceholder cooker" to improve the heat efficiency of the standard spirit stoves then in use, and the layer principle in polar clothing, whereby the traditionally heavy, awkward garments were replaced by layers of lightweight material. In science, secondnameplaceholder is recognised both as one of the founders of modern neurology,[167][168] and as a significant contributor to early oceanographical science, in particular for his work in establishing the Central Oceanographic Laboratory in Christiania.[169]Through his work on behalf of the League of Nations, secondnameplaceholder helped to establish the principle of international responsibility for refugees.[170] Immediately after his death the League set up the secondnameplaceholder International Office for Refugees, a semi-autonomous body under the League's authority, to continue his work. The secondnameplaceholder Office faced great difficulties, in part arising from the large numbers of refugees from the European dictatorships during the 1930s.[171] Nevertheless, it secured the agreement of 14 countries (including a reluctant Great Britain)[172] to the Refugee Convention of 1933.It also helped to repatriate 10,000 Armenians to Yerevan in Soviet Armenia, and to find homes for a further 40,000 in Syria and Lebanon. In 1938, the year in which it was superseded by a wider-ranging body, the secondnameplaceholder Office was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.[171] In 1954, the League's successor body, the United Nations, established the secondnameplaceholder Medal, later named the secondnameplaceholder Refugee Award, given annually by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to an individual, group or organisation "for outstanding work on behalf of the forcibly displaced".[173]Numerous geographical features bear his name: the secondnameplaceholder Basin and the secondnameplaceholder-Gakkel Ridge in the Arctic Ocean;[174] Mount secondnameplaceholder in the Yukon region of Canada;[175] Mount secondnameplaceholder,[176] Mount firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder[177] and secondnameplaceholder Island,[178] all in Antarctica; as well as secondnameplaceholder Island in the Kara Sea, secondnameplaceholder Land in Greenland and secondnameplaceholder Island in Franz Josef Land; 853 secondnameplaceholderia, an asteroid;[179] secondnameplaceholder[180] crater at the Moon's north pole and secondnameplaceholder[181] crater on Mars. His Polhøgda mansion is now home to the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Institute, an independent foundation which engages in research on environmental, energy and resource management politics.[182]A 1968 Norwegian/Soviet biographical film Just a Life: the Story of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was released with Knut Wigert as secondnameplaceholder.[183]The Royal Norwegian Navy launched the first of a series of five  firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder-class frigates in 2004, with HNoMS firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder as its lead ship.[184] Cruise ship MS firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was launched in 2020.[185][186]
(!!)Article(!/!)
Sir Joseph firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder KG (16 October 1863 – 16 March 1937) was a British statesman, son of Joseph secondnameplaceholder and older half-brother of Prime Minister Neville secondnameplaceholder. He served as Chancellor of the Exchequer (twice) and was briefly Conservative Party leader before serving as Foreign Secretary.Brought up to be the political heir of his father, whom he physically resembled, he was elected to Parliament as a Liberal Unionist at a by-election in 1892, and held office in the Unionist coalition governments of 1895–1905, remaining in the Cabinet as Chancellor of the Exchequer (1903–05) after his father resigned in 1903 to campaign for Tariff Reform. After his father's disabling stroke in 1906 firstnameplaceholder became the leading tariff reformer in the House of Commons. Late in 1911 he and Walter Long were due to fight one another for the leadership of the Conservative Party (in succession to Arthur Balfour), but both withdrew in favour of Bonar Law rather than risk a party split on a close result.secondnameplaceholder returned to office in H. H. Asquith's wartime coalition government in May 1915, as Secretary of State for India, but resigned to take responsibility for the disastrous Kut Campaign. He again returned to office in David Lloyd George's coalition government, once again serving as Chancellor of the Exchequer. He then served as Conservative Party leader in the Commons (1921–2), before resigning after the Carlton Club meeting voted to end the Lloyd George Coalition.Like many leading coalitionists, he did not hold office in the Conservative governments of 1922–4. By now regarded as an elder statesman, he served an important term as Foreign Secretary in Stanley Baldwin's Second Government (1924–9), during which he negotiated the Locarno Pact (1925), aimed at preventing war between France and Germany, for which he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. He last held office as First Lord of the Admiralty in 1931. He was one of the few MPs supporting Winston Churchill's appeals for rearmament against the German threat in the 1930s, and remained an active backbench MP until his death in 1937.
<h2>Early life and career</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was born in Birmingham, the second child and eldest son of Joseph secondnameplaceholder,[2] then a rising industrialist and political radical, later Mayor of Birmingham and a dominant figure in Liberal and Unionist politics at the end of the 19th century. His father and mother, the former Harriet Kenrick had a baby daughter Beatrice secondnameplaceholder who would become an educationalist. Harriet died giving birth to firstnameplaceholder,[2] leaving his father so shaken that for almost 25 years he maintained a distance from his first-born son. In 1868, his father married Harriet's cousin, Florence, and had further children, the oldest of whom, Neville, would become Prime Minister in the year of firstnameplaceholder's death.firstnameplaceholder was dominated by his elder sister and was therefore sent away to be educated first at Rugby School "to release him from her thrall",[2] before passing on to Trinity College, Cambridge.[3] While at Trinity College, he became a lifelong friend of F. S. Oliver, a future advocate of Imperial Federation and, after 1909, a prominent member of the Round Table movement. secondnameplaceholder made his first political address in 1884 at a meeting of the university's Political Society and was vice-president of the Cambridge Union.It would seem that from an early age his father had intended for politics to be firstnameplaceholder's future path, and with that in mind, he was sent first to France, where he studied at the Paris Institute of Political Studies and developed a lasting admiration for the French people and culture. For nine months, he was shown the brilliance of Paris under the Third Republic, and he met and dined with the likes of Georges Clemenceau and Alexandre Ribot.From Paris, firstnameplaceholder was sent to Berlin for twelve months, to imbibe the political culture of the other great European power, Germany. Though in his letters home to Beatrice and Neville, he showed an obvious preference for France and the lifestyle he had left behind there, secondnameplaceholder undertook to learn German and learn from his experience in the capital of the Second Reich. Among others, firstnameplaceholder met and dined with the "Iron Chancellor", Otto von Bismarck, an experience that was to hold a special place in his heart for the duration of his life.While attending the University of Berlin, firstnameplaceholder developed a suspicion of the growing nationalism in Germany based upon his experience of the lecturing style of Heinrich von Treitschke, who opened up to him "a new side of the German character - a narrow-minded, proud, intolerant Prussian chauvinism", the consequences of which he was later to ponder during the First World War and the crises of the 1930s.firstnameplaceholder returned to England in 1888, lured largely by the prize of a parliamentary constituency. He was first elected to parliament as a member of his father's own Liberal Unionist Party in 1892, sitting for the seat of East Worcestershire. Owing to the prominence of his father and the alliance between the anti-Home Rule Liberal Unionists and Conservatives, secondnameplaceholder was returned unopposed on 30 March, and at the first sitting of the new session, he walked up the floor of the house flanked by his father and his uncle, Richard.Owing to the dissolution of parliament and the 1892 general election that August, secondnameplaceholder was unable to make his maiden speech until April 1893, but, when delivered, it was acclaimed by the four-time Prime Minister William Ewart Gladstone as "one of the best speeches which has been made". That secondnameplaceholder was speaking against Gladstone's own Second Home Rule Bill does not seem to have dampened the enthusiasm of the Prime Minister, who responded by publicly congratulating both firstnameplaceholder and his father, Joseph, on such an excellent performance. That was highly significant, given the bad blood existing between Joseph secondnameplaceholder and his former leader.
<h2>Political office</h2>
Appointed a junior Whip of the Liberal Unionists after the general election, firstnameplaceholder's main role was to act as his father's "standard bearer" in matters of policy. Following the Conservative and Unionist landslide win in the election of 1895, secondnameplaceholder was appointed Civil Lord of the Admiralty, holding that post until 1900, when he became Financial Secretary to the Treasury. Lord Salisbury retired as Prime Minister in July 1902, and the following month secondnameplaceholder was promoted to the position of Postmaster General by the new premier, the Conservative Arthur J. Balfour, who also designated this a cabinet position,[4] and appointed him to the Privy Council.[5]In the wake of the struggle between his father and Balfour, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder became Chancellor of the Exchequer in 1903. firstnameplaceholder's appointment was largely a compromise solution to the bitter division of the two Unionist heavyweights, which threatened to split the coalition between supporters of secondnameplaceholder's Imperial Tariff campaign and Balfour's more cautious advocacy of protectionism. While firstnameplaceholder supported his father's programme, his influence within the cabinet was diminished following the departure of the senior secondnameplaceholder to become backbenchers. Facing a resurgent Liberal opposition and the threat of an internal party split, Balfour eventually took the Unionists into opposition in December 1905, and in the ensuing rout in the election of 1906, firstnameplaceholder found himself one of the few surviving Liberal Unionists in the House of Commons.After his father's stroke and enforced retirement from active politics a few months later, firstnameplaceholder became the effective leader of the tariff reform campaign within the Unionist Party, and thus, he was a contender for the eventual leadership of the party itself.
<h2>Leadership questions</h2>
With the Unionists in disarray after electoral defeats at both the January and December 1910 elections, Balfour was forced from his position as party leader in November 1911. secondnameplaceholder was one of the leading candidates to succeed as Conservative leader even though he was still technically a member of the Liberal Unionist wing of the coalition (the two parties merged formally only in 1912).secondnameplaceholder was opposed by Canadian-born Bonar Law, Walter Long and Irish Unionist Edward Carson.Given their standing in the party, only secondnameplaceholder and Long had a realistic chance of success and though Balfour had intended secondnameplaceholder to succeed him, it became clear from an early canvass of the sitting MPs that Long would be elected by a slender margin.After a short period of internal party campaigning, secondnameplaceholder determined to withdraw from the contest for the good of the still-divided party. He succeeded in persuading Long to withdraw with him in favour of Law, who was subsequently chosen by unanimous vote as a compromise candidate.secondnameplaceholder's action, while it prevented him from attaining the party leadership and, arguably, the premiership, did a great deal to maintain unity within the Conservative and Liberal Unionist parties at a time of great uncertainty and strain.
<h2>Irish Home Rule</h2>
In the last years before the outbreak of World War I, secondnameplaceholder was concerned with one issue above all others: Home Rule for Ireland. The issue that had prompted his father to leave the Liberal Party in the 1880s now threatened to spill over into outright civil war, with the government of H. H. Asquith committed to the passage of a Third Home Rule Bill. secondnameplaceholder was resolutely opposed to the dissolution of the Union with Ireland. To the strain then was added the death of his father in July 1914, only a few days after the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria, which began the train of events that led to the war.
<h2>First World War</h2>
Pressure from the Conservative opposition, in part led by secondnameplaceholder, eventually resulted in the formation of the wartime coalition government, in 1915. secondnameplaceholder joined the cabinet as Secretary of State for India. Like other politicians, including Arthur Balfour and George Curzon, secondnameplaceholder supported the invasion of Mesopotamia to increase British prestige in the region, thus discouraging a German-inspired Muslim revolt in India.[6]secondnameplaceholder remained at the India Office after David Lloyd George succeeded Asquith as Prime Minister in late 1916, but following inquiries into the failure of the Mesopotamian campaign (undertaken by the separately-administered Indian Army) in 1915, including the loss of the British garrison during the Siege of Kut, secondnameplaceholder resigned his post in 1917; as the minister ultimately responsible, the fault lay with him. He was widely acclaimed for such a principled act.[7]After Lloyd George's Paris speech (12 November 1917) at which he said that "when he saw the appalling casualty lists he wish(ed) it had not been necessary to win so many ("victories")" there was talk of secondnameplaceholder withdrawing support from the government. Lloyd George survived by claiming that the aim of the new inter-Allied Supreme War Council was purely to "coordinate" policy, not to overrule the British generals, who still enjoyed a good deal of support from Conservatives.[8]Later, he returned to government and became a member of the War Cabinet in April 1918 as Minister without Portfolio, replacing Lord Milner, who had become Secretary of State for War.Following the victory of the Lloyd George coalition in the 1918 general election, secondnameplaceholder was again appointed to the position of Chancellor of the Exchequer in January 1919 and immediately faced the huge task of restoring Britain's finances after four years of wartime expenditure.
<h2>Leadership</h2>
Citing ill health, Law retired from the leadership of the Conservative branch of the Lloyd George government in the spring of 1921. His seniority and the general dislike of Curzon, his counterpart in the House of Lords, helped secondnameplaceholder to both succeed Law as Leader of the House of Commons and take over in the office of Lord Privy Seal. He was succeeded at the Exchequer by Sir Robert Horne; it seemed that after ten years of waiting, firstnameplaceholder would again be given the opportunity of succeeding to the premiership.The Lloyd George coalition was beginning to falter, following numerous scandals and the unsuccessful conclusion of the Anglo-Irish War, and it was widely believed that it would not survive until the next general election. He had previously had little regard for Lloyd George, but the opportunity of working closely with the "Welsh Wizard" gave secondnameplaceholder a new insight into his nominal superior in the government (by now, the Conservative Party was by far the largest partner in the government).It was an unfortunate change of allegiance for secondnameplaceholder, for by late 1921, the Conservative backbenchers were growing more and more restless for an end to the coalition and a return to single-party (Conservative) government. Conservatives in the House of Lords began, in public, to oppose the coalition, disregarding calls for support from secondnameplaceholder. In the country at large, Conservative candidates began to oppose the coalition at by-elections, and discontent spread to the House of Commons.In the autumn of 1922, secondnameplaceholder faced a backbench revolt, largely led by Stanley Baldwin, designed to oust Lloyd George, and when he summoned the Carlton Club meeting 19 October 1922, of Conservative MPs, a motion was there passed for fighting the forthcoming election as an independent party. secondnameplaceholder resigned the party leadership rather than act against what he believed to be his duty. He was succeeded by Law, whose views and intentions he had predicted the evening before the vote at a private meeting. Law formed a government shortly thereafter, but secondnameplaceholder was not given a post, but it seems that he would not have accepted a position even if he had been offered one.firstnameplaceholder and Neville secondnameplaceholder and Iain Duncan Smith are the only three Conservative leaders not to lead the party into a general election. Until William Hague (1997-2001), firstnameplaceholder had been the only Conservative overall leader in the history of the party not to become Prime Minister.
<h2>Foreign Secretary</h2>
After the second resignation of Law in May 1923 (Law died from throat cancer later that year), secondnameplaceholder was passed over again for the leadership of the party in favour of Stanley Baldwin. Baldwin offered secondnameplaceholder the post of Lord Privy Seal, but secondnameplaceholder insisted other former ministers from the Coalition to be included as well; Baldwin refused. However, secondnameplaceholder returned to government when Baldwin formed his second ministry following success in the election of October 1924, serving in the important office of Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs from 1924 to 1929. secondnameplaceholder was largely allowed a free hand by the easy-going Baldwin.It is as Foreign Secretary that secondnameplaceholder's place in history was finally assured. In a difficult period in international relations, secondnameplaceholder faced not only a split in the entente cordiale by the French invasion of the Ruhr but also the controversy over the 1924 Geneva Protocol, which threatened to dilute British sovereignty over the issue of League of Nations economic sanctions.
<h2>Locarno Pact</h2>
Despite the importance to history of other pressing issues, his reputation chiefly rests on his part in the negotiations over what came to be known as the Locarno Pact of 1925. Seeking to maintain the postwar status quo in the West, secondnameplaceholder responded favourably to the approaches of German Foreign Minister Gustav Stresemann for a British guarantee of Germany's western borders. Besides promoting Franco-German reconciliation, secondnameplaceholder's main motive was to create a situation in which Germany could pursue territorial revisionism in Eastern Europe peacefully.[9]secondnameplaceholder's understanding was that if Franco-German relations improved, France would gradually abandon the Cordon sanitaire, the French alliance system in Eastern Europe between the wars.[9] Once France had abandoned its allies in Eastern Europe as the price of better relations with the Reich, the Poles and Czechoslovaks would have no Great Power ally to protect them, would be forced to adjust to German demands. secondnameplaceholder believed that they would peacefully hand over the territories claimed by Germany such as the Sudetenland, the Polish Corridor and the Free City of Danzig.[9] Promoting territorial revisionism in Eastern Europe in Germany's favour was one of secondnameplaceholder's principal reasons for Locarno.Together with Aristide Briand of France, secondnameplaceholder and Stresemann met at the town of Locarno in October 1925 and signed a mutual agreement (together with representatives from Belgium and Italy) to settle all differences between the nations by arbitration, not war. For his services, secondnameplaceholder was not only awarded the Nobel Peace Prize but also made a Knight of the Order of the Garter. He was the first ordinary Knight of the Garter since Elizabethan times (Sir Henry Lee) to die without having been made a peer. He was the 871st Knight of the Garter.secondnameplaceholder also secured Britain's accession to the Kellogg-Briand Pact, which theoretically outlawed war as an instrument of policy. secondnameplaceholder infamously said that Italian dictator Benito Mussolini was "a man with whom business could be done".[10]
<h2>Later career</h2>
Following his less-satisfactory engagement in issues in the Far East and Egypt, and the resignation of Baldwin's government after the election of 1929, secondnameplaceholder resigned his position as Foreign Secretary and went into retirement. He briefly returned to government in 1931 as First Lord of the Admiralty in Ramsay MacDonald's first National Government, but soon retired later that year after having been forced to deal with the unfortunate Invergordon Mutiny.Over the next six years as a senior backbencher, he gave strong support to the National Government on domestic issues but was critical on foreign policy. In 1935 the government faced a parliamentary rebellion over the Hoare-Laval Pact; his opposition to the vote of censure is widely believed to have been instrumental in saving the government from defeat on the floor of the House.secondnameplaceholder was again briefly considered in 1935 for the post of Foreign Secretary but was passed over once the crisis was over for being too old for the job.[11] Instead, his advice was sought as to the suitability of his former Parliamentary Private Secretary, now Minister for the League of Nations, Anthony Eden for the post.
<h2>Calls for rearmament</h2>
From 1934 to 1937, secondnameplaceholder was, with Winston Churchill, Roger Keyes and Leo Amery, the most prominent voice calling for British rearmament in the face of a growing threat from Nazi Germany.However, in 1935, the British Government produced a White Paper and announced modest rearmament.[12] Although Baldwin would forever be condemned for his failure to rearm sufficiently, the Labour Party opposed the White Paper. Attlee said:Afterwards, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, the former British Foreign Secretary, fully supported Stanley Baldwin and severely criticised Attlee's speech with the words:In addition to speaking eloquently in Parliament on the matter, he was the chairman of two Conservative parliamentary delegations in late 1936 that met with Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin to remonstrate with him about his government's delay in rearming the British defence forces.[15] More respected than Churchill, secondnameplaceholder became something of an icon to young Conservatives, as the last survivor of Victorian high politics.Though he never again served in a government, he survived in good health until March 1937, dying just ten weeks before his younger half-brother, Neville, became the first and only member of the secondnameplaceholder dynasty to become Prime Minister.secondnameplaceholder died at the age of 73 in his London home, 24 Egerton Terrace, on 16 March 1937. He is buried in East Finchley Cemetery in London.His estate was valued at probate at £45,044, a relatively modest sum for such a famous public figure. Much of his father's fortune had been lost in a failed attempt by his younger brother Neville to grow sisal in the West Indies in the early 1890s, and unlike Neville, he never went into business to make money for himself.His personal and political papers are housed in the Cadbury Research Library at the University of Birmingham.
<h2>Assessments</h2>
Robert Blake wrote that firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder "for all his talents was only a thin echo of his formidable father, a mere shadow of that extraordinary figure ... firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was altogether kinder than his father, more likeable, more honourable, more high-minded and less effective … he lacked that ultimate hardness without which men seldom reach supreme political power". Blake comments that he often missed his chances because he could be persuaded to back off by the suggestion that he was acting for self-seeking reasons, hence Churchill's quip that "he always played the game, and he always lost it".[16]David Dutton comments that early assessments of secondnameplaceholder's career compared him unfavourably with his father, who overshadowed his early career, and his brother, who overshadowed his later decades. In his forties, when he was ready to carve out his own identity, he had to act as a surrogate for his disabled father, whom he resembled in appearance (although he was softer and less wiry, both in face and body) and dress (wearing a monocle, and an orchid in his lapel). Until William Hague (1997-2001), he was the only Conservative leader of the twentieth century not to become Prime Minister. Although this is sometimes attributed to character defects, Dutton argues that he was a major figure in his own right, who only narrowly missed becoming Prime Minister in 1922 or 1923. Dutton quotes with approval Leo Amery's verdict written just after secondnameplaceholder's death: 'He just missed greatness and the highest position, but his was a fine life of honourable public service'.[17]secondnameplaceholder could speak effectively, but was never a stirring orator. For most of his career he was renowned for rectitude and civic duty. Before the war secondnameplaceholder had been a somewhat reluctant radical, but after 1918 he became more conservative, concerned at the new threat of socialism, and whose dress – he not only wore a monocle and frock coat but was one of the last MPs to wear a top hat inside the Commons Chamber – made him appear a relic from a previous generation. Dutton suggests that his "exaggerated sense of his own importance and dignity which compounded an already stiff and unbending personal demeanour", came from having to serve under men – Law and Baldwin – whom he regarded as his juniors.[17]
<h2>Personal life</h2>
In 1906, secondnameplaceholder married Ivy Muriel Dundas (died 1941), daughter of Colonel Henry Dundas.[18] She was created a Dame Grand Cross of the Order of the British Empire (GBE) in 1925. The couple had two sons, Joseph and Lawrence, and a daughter, Diane.During the 1920s, the secondnameplaceholders lived at a house called Twytt's Ghyll in Fir Toll Road, Mayfield, East Sussex. The house was sold in 1929. R.C.G. Foster said, "He kept himself quite aloof from the village and was not popular with his neighbours".[citation needed] He had an interest in rock gardening.[19] At his death, his estate was valued for probate at £45,044 18/1.[20]
<h2>Archives</h2>
A collection of archival material related to firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder can be found at the Cadbury Research Library, University of Birmingham.[21] A separate collection of letters relating to firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder can also be found at the Cadbury Research Library, University of Birmingham.[22]
<h2>Further reading</h2>
For such a prominent historical figure, secondnameplaceholder has had very little attention from academics. The official biography by Sir Charles Petrie is reputable although the more recent work by David Dutton is a far more balanced account. Dutton is widely regarded as the expert on firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder although he disagrees with Richard Grayson's assessment of secondnameplaceholder's views on France and Germany. Peter Marsh, author of the most recent biography of Joseph secondnameplaceholder, is currently studying the secondnameplaceholder family.  Richard Scully is investigating Sir firstnameplaceholder's year in Germany and its subsequent effect on his opinions and politics.
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder Gates Dawes (August 27, 1865 – April 23, 1951) was an American banker, general, diplomat, composer, and Republican politician who was the 30th vice president of the United States from 1925 to 1929. For his work on the Dawes Plan for World War I reparations, he was a co-recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize in 1925.Born in Marietta, Ohio, Dawes attended Cincinnati Law School before beginning a legal career in Lincoln, Nebraska. After serving as a gas plant executive, he managed William McKinley's 1896 presidential campaign in Illinois. After the election, McKinley appointed Dawes as the Comptroller of the Currency, and he remained in that position until 1901 before forming the Central Trust Company of Illinois. Dawes served as a general during World War I and was the chairman of the general purchasing board for the American Expeditionary Forces. In 1921, President Warren G. Harding appointed Dawes as the first Director of the Bureau of the Budget. Dawes also served on the Allied Reparations Commission, where he helped formulate the Dawes Plan to aid the struggling German economy, though the plan was eventually replaced by the Young Plan.The 1924 Republican National Convention nominated President Calvin Coolidge without opposition. After Frank Lowden declined the vice-presidential nomination, the convention chose Dawes as Coolidge's running mate. The Republican ticket won the 1924 presidential election, and Dawes was sworn in as vice president in 1925. Dawes helped pass the McNary–Haugen Farm Relief Bill in Congress, but President Coolidge vetoed it. Dawes was a candidate for renomination at the 1928 Republican National Convention, but Coolidge's opposition to Dawes helped ensure that firstnameplaceholder Curtis was nominated instead. In 1929, President Herbert Hoover appointed Dawes to be the Ambassador to the United Kingdom. Dawes also briefly led the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, which organized a government response to the Great Depression. He resigned from that position in 1932 to return to banking, and he died in 1951 of coronary thrombosis.
<h2>Early life and family</h2>
Dawes was born in Marietta, Ohio, in Washington County, son of Civil War General Rufus Dawes and his wife Mary Beman Gates.[1] Rufus had commanded the 6th Wisconsin Regiment of the Iron Brigade from 1863 to 1864 during the American Civil War. His uncle Ephraim C. Dawes, younger brother to Rufus, was a Major who served under Ulysses S. Grant at the Battles of Shiloh and Vicksburg.Dawes's brothers were Rufus C. Dawes, Beman Gates Dawes, and Henry May Dawes, all prominent businessmen or politicians. He also had two sisters, Mary Frances Dawes Beach, and Betsey Gates Dawes Hoyt.[2]Dawes was a descendant of Edward Doty, a passenger on the Mayflower, and William Dawes who rode with Paul Revere to warn American colonists of the advancing British army at the outbreak of the American Revolution.Dawes married Caro Blymyer on January 24, 1889.[3] They had a son, Rufus Fearing (1890–1912), and a daughter, Carolyn. They later adopted two children, Dana and Virginia.[4]
<h2>Education</h2>
He graduated from Marietta College in 1884[5] and Cincinnati Law School in 1886.[6]  His fraternity was Delta Upsilon.[citation needed]
<h2>Early business career</h2>
Dawes was admitted to the bar in Nebraska, and he practiced in Lincoln, Nebraska, from 1887 to 1894.[5][7] When Lieutenant John Pershing, the future Army general, was appointed as a military instructor at the University of Nebraska while attending its law school, he and Dawes met and formed a lifelong friendship.[8] Dawes also met Democratic Congressman William Jennings Bryan. The two became friends despite their disagreement over free silver policies.[9]Dawes relocated from Lincoln to Chicago during the Panic of 1893.[9] In 1894, Dawes acquired interests several Midwestern gas plants. He became the president of both the La Crosse Gas Light Company in La Crosse, Wisconsin, and the Northwestern Gas Light and Coke Company in Evanston, Illinois.[4]
<h2>Interest in music</h2>
Dawes was a self-taught pianist and a composer. His composition Melody in A Major became a well-known piano and violin song in 1912.[10] Marie Edwards made a popular arrangement of the work in 1921.[11] Also, in 1921, it was arranged for a small orchestra by Adolf G. Hoffmann.[12] Melody in A Major was played at many official functions that Dawes attended.[13]In 1951, Carl Sigman added lyrics to Melody in A Major, transforming the song into "It's All in the Game".[13] Tommy Edwards's recording of "It's All in the Game" was a number-one hit on the American Billboard record chart for six weeks in 1958.[14] Edwards's version of the song also hit number one on the United Kingdom chart that year.[15]Since then, it has become a pop standard. Numerous artists have recorded versions, including Cliff Richard, The Four Tops, Isaac Hayes, Jackie DeShannon, Van Morrison, Nat "King" Cole, Brook Benton, Elton John, Mel Carter, Donny and Marie Osmond, Barry Manilow, and Keith Jarrett.Dawes is the only vice president to be credited with a number-one pop hit.[13] Dawes and Sonny Bono are the only people credited with a number-one pop hit who were also members of the United States Senate or House of Representatives.[16] Dawes and Bob Dylan (as a writer) are the only persons credited with a number-one pop hit to have also won a Nobel Prize.[a]Dawes was a brother of Phi Mu Alpha Sinfonia.[17]
<h2>Early political career</h2>
Dawes's prominent positions in business caught the attention of Republican party leaders. They asked Dawes to manage the Illinois portion of William McKinley's bid for the Presidency of the United States in 1896.[18] Following McKinley's election, Dawes was rewarded for his efforts by being named Comptroller of the Currency, United States Department of the Treasury. Serving in that position from 1898 to 1901, he collected more than $25 million from banks that had failed during the Panic of 1893 and changed banking practices to try to prevent another panic.[citation needed]In October 1901, Dawes left the Department of the Treasury to pursue a U.S. Senate seat from Illinois. He thought that, with the help of the McKinley Administration, he could win it. McKinley was assassinated and his successor, President Theodore Roosevelt, preferred Dawes's opponent.[19] In 1902, following this unsuccessful attempt at legislative office, Dawes declared that he was done with politics. He organized the Central Trust Company of Illinois, where he served as its president until 1921.[4]On September 5, 1912, Dawes's 21-year-old son Rufus drowned in Geneva Lake,[20] while on summer break from Princeton University. In his memory, Dawes created homeless shelters in both Chicago and Boston[21] and financed the construction of a dormitory at his son's alma mater, the Lawrenceville School in Lawrenceville, New Jersey.[22]
<h2>World War I</h2>
Dawes helped support the first Anglo-French Loan to the Entente powers of $500 million. Dawes's support was important because the House of Morgan needed public support from a non-Morgan banker. The Morgan banker Thomas W. Lamont said that Dawes's support would "make a position for him in the banking world such as he otherwise could never hope to make."[23] (Loans were seen as possibly violating neutrality, and Wilson was still resisting permitting loans.)During the First World War, Dawes was commissioned as a major on June 11, 1917, in the 17th Engineers.  He was subsequently promoted to lieutenant colonel (July 17, 1917), and colonel (January 16, 1918).  In October 1918, he was promoted to brigadier general.[24]  From August 1917 to August 1919, Dawes served in France during World War I as chairman of the general purchasing board for the American Expeditionary Forces (AEF). His proposal to Gen. Pershing was adopted informed the Military Board of Allied Supply, on which he served as the American delegate in 1918. When the war ended in November, he became a member of the  Liquidation Commission of the United States War Department.  He was decorated with the Distinguished Service Medal[25] and the French Croix de Guerre in recognition of his service.  He returned to the United States on board the SS Leviathan in August 1919.[26]In February 1921, the U.S. Senate held hearings on war expenditures. During heated testimony, Dawes burst out, "Hell and Maria, we weren't trying to keep a set of books over there, we were trying to win a war!"[27] He was later known as "Hell and Maria Dawes" (although he always insisted the expression was "Helen Maria", an exclamation he claimed was common in Nebraska).[28] Dawes resigned from the Army in 1919[4] and became a member of the American Legion.
<h2>1920s: Financing Europe and the Nobel Peace Prize</h2>
He supported Frank Lowden at the 1920 Republican National Convention, but the presidential nomination went to Warren G. Harding.[9] When the Bureau of the Budget was created, he was appointed in 1921 by President Harding as its first director. Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover appointed him to the Allied Reparations Commission in 1923.  He came up with the solution to the European crisis: The Dawes Plan loaned large sums of American bank money to the German economy. The loans permitted Germany to recover its industrial production while making reparation payments to France and Belgium as required by the Versailles Treaty. In 1929 the Reparations Commission, under Owen Young, replaced the plan with the more permanent Young Plan, which reduced the total amount of reparations and called for the removal of occupying forces.[29][30]  For his work on the Dawes Plan that enabled Germany to restore and stabilize its economy, Dawes shared the Nobel Peace Prize in 1925.[4]
<h2>Vice presidency (1925–1929)</h2>
At the 1924 Republican National Convention, President Calvin Coolidge was quickly selected almost without opposition to be the Republican presidential nominee.[32] The vice-presidential nominee was more contested. Illinois Governor Frank Lowden was nominated, but declined. Coolidge's next choice was Idaho Senator William Borah, but he also declined the nomination. The Republican National Chairman, William Butler, wanted to nominate then Commerce Secretary Herbert Hoover, but he was not sufficiently popular.  Eventually, the delegates chose Dawes. Coolidge quickly accepted the delegates' choice and felt that Dawes would be loyal to him and make a strong addition to his campaign.[32]Dawes traveled throughout the country during the campaign, giving speeches to bolster the Republican ticket. He frequently attacked Progressive nominee Robert M. La Follette as a dangerous radical who sympathized with the Bolsheviks.[9] The Coolidge-Dawes ticket was elected on November 4, 1924, with more popular votes than the candidates of the Democratic and Progressive parties combined.[33] The inauguration was held on March 4, 1925.[34]On March 10, the Senate debated the president's nomination of firstnameplaceholder B. Warren to be United States Attorney General. In the wake of the Teapot Dome scandal and other scandals, Democrats and Progressive Republicans objected to the nomination because of Warren's close association with the Sugar Trust. At midday, six speakers were scheduled to address Warren's nomination. Desiring to take a break for a nap, Dawes consulted the majority and minority leaders, who assured him that no vote would be taken that afternoon. After Dawes left the Senate, however, all but one of the scheduled speakers decided against making formal remarks, and a vote was taken. When it became apparent that the vote would be tied, Republican leaders hastily called Dawes at the Willard Hotel, and he immediately left for the Capitol. The first vote was 40-40, a tie which Dawes could have broken in Warren's favor.  While waiting for Dawes to arrive, the only Democratic senator who had voted for Warren switched his vote. The nomination then failed 41-39—the first such rejection of a president's nominee in nearly 60 years.[31] This incident was chronicled in a derisive poem, based on the Longfellow poem "Paul Revere's Ride;" it began with the line, "Come gather round children and hold your applause for the afternoon ride of Charlie Dawes." The choice of poem was based on firstnameplaceholder Dawes being descended from William Dawes, who rode with Paul Revere.[citation needed]Dawes and Coolidge quickly became alienated from one another. Dawes declined to attend Cabinet meetings and annoyed Coolidge with his attack on the Senate filibuster. Dawes championed the McNary–Haugen Farm Relief Bill, which sought to alleviate the 1920s farm crisis by having the government buy surplus farm produce and sell that surplus in foreign markets. Dawes helped ensure the passage of the bill through Congress, but President Coolidge vetoed it.[9]In 1927, Coolidge announced that he would not seek re-election. Dawes again favored Frank Lowden at the 1928 Republican National Convention, but the convention chose Herbert Hoover.[9] Rumors circulated about Dawes being chosen as Hoover's running mate.  Coolidge made it known that he would consider the renomination of Dawes as vice president to be an insult. firstnameplaceholder Curtis of Kansas, known for his skills in collaboration, was chosen as Hoover's running mate.[35]
<h2>Court of St. James's and the RFC</h2>
After Dawes had finished his term as vice president, he served as the U.S. Ambassador to the United Kingdom (known formally as the Court of St. James's) from 1929 to 1931.[36] Overall, Dawes was a very effective U.S. ambassador, as George V's son, the future Edward VIII, would later confirm in his memoirs.[citation needed] Dawes was rather rough-hewn for some of his duties, disliking having to present American débutantes to the King. On his first visit to the royal court, in deference to American public opinion, he refused to wear the customary Court dress, which then included knee breeches. This episode was said to upset the King, who had been prevented by illness from attending the event.As the Great Depression continued to ravage the United States, Dawes accepted President Herbert Hoover's appeal to leave diplomatic office and head the newly created Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC). But after a few months, Dawes resigned from the RFC. As chairman of the failing Central Republic Bank and Trust Company of Chicago, he felt obligated to work for its rescue. Political opponents alleged that, under Dawes's leadership, the RFC had given preferential treatment to his bank. This marked the end of Dawes's career in public service. For the 1932 election, Hoover considered the possibility of adding Dawes to the ticket in place of Curtis, but Dawes declined the potential offer.[37]Later in 1932, Dawes and associates formed the City National Bank and Trust Co. to take over the deposits of the failed Central Republic Bank and Trust Company.[38]
<h2>Later life</h2>
Dawes served for nearly two decades as chairman of the board of City National from 1932 until his death.[39] He died on April 23, 1951 at his Evanston home from coronary thrombosis at the age of 85.[40]  He is interred in Rosehill Cemetery, Chicago.[41]
<h2>Memberships</h2>
Dawes belonged to several military, hereditary and veteran organizations.  These included the Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States, the Sons of the American Revolution, the General Society of Colonial Wars and the American Legion.
<h2>Honors</h2>
A Chicago public school located at 3810 w 81st Place is named in his honor.Distinguished Service Medal citation:
<h2>Legacy</h2>
According to Annette Dunlap, Dawes was:In 1944, he bequeathed his lakeshore home in Evanston to Northwestern University for the Evanston Historical Society (later renamed the Evanston History Center). Dawes lived in the house until his death. The Dawes family continued to occupy it until the death of Mrs. Dawes in 1957. Since then, the Evanston History Center operates out of the house and manages it as a museum. Designated a National Historic Landmark, the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder House is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder Pierre Henri secondnameplaceholder (French: [aʁistid pjɛʁ ɑ̃ʁi bʁijɑ̃]; 28 March 1862 – 7 March 1932) was a French statesman who served eleven terms as Prime Minister of France during the French Third Republic. He is mainly remembered for his focus on international issues and reconciliation politics during the interwar period (1918–1939).In 1926, he received the Nobel Peace Prize along with German Foreign Minister Gustav Stresemann for the realization of the Locarno Treaties, which aimed at reconciliation between France and Germany after the First World War.[1][2] To avoid another worldwide conflict, he was instrumental in the agreement known as the Kellogg–secondnameplaceholder Pact of 1929, as well to establish a "European Union" in 1929.[3] However, all his efforts were compromised by the rise of nationalistic and revanchist ideas like Nazism and Fascism following the Great Depression.
<h2>Early life</h2>
He was born in Nantes, Loire-Atlantique of a petit bourgeois family.  He attended the Nantes Lycée, where, in 1877, he developed a close friendship with Jules Verne.[4] He studied law at the Faculty of Law of Paris,[5] and soon went into politics, associating himself with the most advanced movements, writing articles for the syndicalist journal Le Peuple, and directing the Lanterne for some time. From this he passed to the Petite République, leaving it to found L'Humanité, in collaboration with Jean Jaurès.[6]
<h2>Activism</h2>
At the same time he was prominent in the movement for the formation of trade unions, and at the congress of workers at Nantes in 1894, he secured the adoption of the labor union idea against the adherents of Jules Guesde. From that time, secondnameplaceholder was one of the leaders of the French Socialist Party. In 1902, after several unsuccessful attempts, he was elected deputy. He declared himself a strong partisan of the union of the left in what was known as the Bloc, to check the reactionary deputies of the right.[6]From the beginning of his career in the Chamber of Deputies, secondnameplaceholder was occupied with the question of the separation of church and state. He was appointed the reporter of the commission charged with the preparation of the 1905 law on separation, and his report at once marked him out as one of the coming leaders. He succeeded in carrying his project through with but slight modifications, and without dividing the parties upon whose support he relied.[6]He was the principal author of the law of separation, but, not content with preparing it; he wished to apply it as well. The ministry of Maurice Rouvier was allowing disturbances during the taking of inventories of church property, a clause of the law for which secondnameplaceholder was not responsible. Consequently, he accepted the portfolio of Public Instruction and Worship in the Sarrien ministry (1906). So far as the chamber was concerned, his success was complete. But the acceptance of a position in a bourgeois ministry led to his exclusion from the Unified Socialist Party (March 1906). As opposed to Jaurès, he contended that the Socialists should co-operate actively with the Radicals in all matters of reform, and not stand aloof to await the complete fulfillment of their ideals.[6] He himself was atheist.[7][8]He became a freemason in the lodge Le Trait d'Union in July 1887 while the lodge did not record his name in spite of his repeated requests.[9] The lodge declared "unworthy" to him on 6 September 1889.[10] In 1895 he joined the lodge Les Chevaliers du Travail that was established in 1893.[9]
<h2>Prime Minister of France</h2>
secondnameplaceholder served as Minister of Justice under Clemenceau in 1908–9, before succeeding Clemenceau as Prime Minister on 24 July 1909, serving until 2 March 1911. In social policy, secondnameplaceholder's first ministry was notable for the passage of a bill in April 1910 for workers' and farmers' pensions.[11] That same year, compulsory sickness and old-age insurance was introduced for 8 million rural and urban workers. However, a law court decision in 1912 that questioned the legality of compulsion "enabled a large proportion of employers and workers to evade the law."[12]secondnameplaceholder again served as Minister of Justice 1912-13 under the premiership of the rightwinger Raymond Poincaré (soon to become president of the Republic), before again becoming Prime Minister for a few months from 21 January 1913 until 22 March 1913.At the end of August 1914, following the outbreak of the First World War, secondnameplaceholder again became Minister of Justice when René Viviani reconstructed his ministry. In the winter of 1914-15 secondnameplaceholder was one of those who pushed for an expedition to Salonika, in the hope of helping Serbia, and perhaps bringing Greece, Romania, Bulgaria and Italy into the war as a pro-French bloc, which would also act as a barrier to future Russian expansion in the Balkans. He got on well with Lloyd George, who was also, contrary to military advice, keen for operations in the Balkans, and had a long talk with him on 4 February 1915. secondnameplaceholder was the main mover in persuading Maurice Sarrail to accept the Salonika command in August 1915.[13]In October 1915 following an unsuccessful French offensive and the entry of Bulgaria, secondnameplaceholder again became Prime Minister (29 October 1915), succeeding René Viviani. He also became Foreign Minister for the first time, a post held by Théophile Delcassé until the final weeks of the previous government. He was also pledged to "unité de front", not just between the military and Parliament but also closer links with the other Allies, a pledge met with "prolonged, thunderous applause" by the deputies.[14]Draft proposals for Allied cooperation, prepared by Lord Esher and Maurice Hankey were on the table by the time British Prime Minister H. H. Asquith visited Paris on 17 November (mainly to discuss Greece, and only his second wartime talks with France; the first had been with Viviani in July 1915).[14]The opening weeks of secondnameplaceholder's ministry required him to broker an agreement between General Gallieni, the new War Minister, and General Joffre, newly (2 December) promoted to "Commander-in-Chief of the French Armies" (generalissimo) over all theatres apart from North Africa.[15][16]In the poisonous atmosphere after the opening of the German attack at Verdun (21 February 1916), Gallieni read an angry report at the Council of Ministers on 7 March criticising Joffre's conduct of operations over the last eighteen months and demanding ministerial control, then resigned. He was falsely suspected of wanting to launch a military takeover of the government.[17] secondnameplaceholder knew that publication of the report would damage morale and might bring down the government. Gallieni was persuaded to remain in office until a replacement had been agreed.[18] General Roques was appointed after it had been ensured that Joffre had no objections.[19]The first formal Allied conference met in Paris on 26 March 1916 (Italy did not participate) but initially made little impact, perhaps because secondnameplaceholder had vetoed the British suggestion of a permanent secretariat,[20] or perhaps because there had been three informal sets of Anglo-French talks in the last quarter of 1915, one of which, the Chantilly meeting, had already seen strategy plans drawn up.[14]Late in March 1916 Joffre and secondnameplaceholder blocked the withdrawal of five British divisions from Salonika. secondnameplaceholder was widely suspected of wanting to make his mistress Princess George of Greece, who was born a Bonaparte.[21] In the spring of 1916 secondnameplaceholder urged Sarrail to take the offensive in the Balkans to take some of the heat off Verdun, although the British, preoccupied with the upcoming Somme offensive, declined to send further troops and Sarrail's offensive that summer was not a success.[22] secondnameplaceholder also attended the conference at Saleux on 31 May 1916 about the upcoming Anglo-French offensive on the Somme, with President Poincaré (on whose train it was held), General Foch (commander, Army Group North) and the British Commander-in-Chief General Haig.[23]The first Secret Session of the Chamber of Deputies was held in June 1916 to discuss the shortcomings of the defence at Verdun. The government won a vote of confidence but with a clause demanding "effective supervision" of the army. The Parliamentary Army Commission elected Abel Ferry as a commissioner (1 August). By October Ferry was presenting his fourth report on army railways, to Joffre's fury.[24]Late in 1916 Roques had been sent on a fact-finding mission to Salonika after Britain, Italy and Russia had pushed for the dismissal of the theatre commander Sarrail. To secondnameplaceholder's and Joffre's surprise, Roques returned recommending that Sarrail be reinforced and that Sarrail no longer report to Joffre. Coming on the back of the disappointing results of the Somme campaign and the defeat of Romania, Roques' report further discredited secondnameplaceholder and Joffre and added to the Parliamentary Deputies' demands for a closed session.[25] In November Ferry presented a report on the shortage of manpower. A secret session was held on 21 November about calling up the Class of 1918[26] followed by another a week later.[24]On 27 November secondnameplaceholder proposed that Joffre be effectively demoted to commander-in-chief in northern France, with both he and Sarrail reporting to the War Minister, although he withdrew this proposal after Joffre threatened resignation. The Closed Session began on 28 November and lasted until 7 December. secondnameplaceholder had little choice but to make concessions to preserve his government, and in a speech of 29 November he promised to repeal Joffre's promotion of December 1915 and in vague terms to appoint a general as technical adviser to the government. secondnameplaceholder survived a confidence vote by 344-160 (six months earlier he had won a confidence vote 440-80).[25]On 13 December secondnameplaceholder formed a new government, reducing the size of the Council of Ministers from 23 to 10 and replacing Roques with General Lyautey. That day his government survived a vote of confidence by 30 votes, and Joffre was appointed "general-in-chief of the French armies, technical adviser to the government, consultative member of the War Committee" (he was persuaded to accept by secondnameplaceholder, but soon found that he had been stripped of real power and asked to be relieved altogether on 26 December), with Nivelle replacing him as commander-in-chief of the Armies of the North and Northeast.[27]A Senate Secret Session on 21 December attacked secondnameplaceholder's plans for a smaller war cabinet as "yet another level of bureaucracy"; on 23 December secondnameplaceholder pledged that he would continue to push for a "permanent Allied bureau" to secure constant cooperation between the Allied nations.[28] secondnameplaceholder's reduced War Cabinet was formed in imitation of the small executive body formed by Lloyd George, just appointed Prime Minister of Britain, but in practice secondnameplaceholder's often met just prior to meetings of the main Cabinet. Painlevé declined the job of War Minister as he would have preferred Petain as commander-in-chief rather than the inexperienced Nivelle.[29] Like President Poincaré secondnameplaceholder had thought Petain too cautious to be suitable.[30]Nivelle's appointment caused great friction between the British and French high commands, after Lloyd George attempted to have Haig placed under Nivelle's command at the Calais Conference in January. secondnameplaceholder only reluctantly agreed to attend another allied conference in London (12–13 March 1917) to resolve the matter.[31] secondnameplaceholder resigned as Prime Minister on 20 March 1917 as a result of disagreements over the prospective Nivelle Offensive, to be succeeded by Alexandre Ribot.secondnameplaceholder returned to power in 1921. He supervised the French role in the Washington Naval Conference of 1921–22. Three factors guided the French strategy and necessitated a Mediterranean focus: the French navy needed to carry a great many goods, the Mediterranean was the axis of chief interest, and a supply of oil was essential. The primary goal was to defend French North Africa, and secondnameplaceholder made practical choices, for naval policy was a reflection of overall foreign policy. The Conference agreed on the American proposal that capital ships be limited to a ratio of 5 to 5 to 3 for the United States, Britain, and Japan, with Italy and France allocated 1.7 each. France's participation reflected its need to deal with its diminishing power and reduced human, material, and financial resources.[32]secondnameplaceholder's efforts to come to an agreement over reparations with the Germans failed in the wake of German intransigence, and he was succeeded by the more bellicose Raymond Poincaré.  In the wake of the Ruhr Crisis, however, secondnameplaceholder's more conciliatory style became more acceptable, and he returned to the Quai d'Orsay in 1925.  He would remain foreign minister until his death in 1932.  During this time, he was a member of 14 cabinets, four of which he headed himself in 1925-1926 and 1929.secondnameplaceholder negotiated the secondnameplaceholder-Ceretti Agreement with the Vatican, giving the French government a role in the appointment of Catholic bishops.
<h2>Kellogg–Briand Pact</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder received the 1926 Nobel Peace Prize together with Gustav Stresemann of Germany for the Locarno Treaties[33] (Austen Chamberlain of the United Kingdom had received a share of the Peace Prize a year earlier for the same agreement[34]).A 1927 proposal by secondnameplaceholder and United States Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg for a universal pact outlawing war led the following year to the Pact of Paris, aka the Kellogg–secondnameplaceholder Pact.[35]
<h2>Briand Plan for European union</h2>
As foreign minister secondnameplaceholder formulated an original proposal for a new economic union of Europe.[36] Described as secondnameplaceholder's Locarno diplomacy and as an aspect of Franco-German rapprochement, it was his answer to Germany's quick economic recovery and future political power. secondnameplaceholder made his proposals in a speech in favor of a European Union in the League of Nations on 5 September 1929, and in 1930, in his "Memorandum on the Organization of a Regime of European Federal Union" for the Government of France.[37]The idea was to provide a framework to contain France's former enemy while preserving as much of the 1919 Versailles settlement as possible. The secondnameplaceholder plan entailed the economic collaboration of the great industrial areas of Europe and the provision of political security to Eastern Europe against Soviet threats. The basis was economic cooperation, but his fundamental concept was political, for it was political power that would determine economic choices. The plan, under the Memorandum on the Organization of a System of European Federal Union, was in the end presented as a French initiative to the League of Nations. With the death of his principal supporter, German foreign minister Gustav Stresemann, and the onset of the Great Depression in 1929, secondnameplaceholder's plan was never adopted but it suggested an economic framework for developments after World War II that eventually resulted in the European Union.[38]In evaluating his internationalism, historian Douglas Houston concludes:
<h2>Governments</h2>
ChangesChangesChangesChangesChangesGeorges Suarez's multi-volume biography of secondnameplaceholder (1938–52) is of particular value to historians as it cites documents lost in 1940.[1]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder Ernst secondnameplaceholder (firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (help·info); 10 May 1878 – 3 October 1929) was a German statesman who served as chancellor in 1923 (for 102 days) and as foreign minister from 1923 to 1929, during the Weimar Republic.His most notable achievement was the reconciliation between Germany and France, for which he and French Prime Minister Aristide Briand received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1926. During a period of political instability and fragile, short-lived governments, he was the most influential cabinet member in most of the Weimar Republic's existence. During his political career, he represented three successive liberal parties; he was the dominant figure of the German People's Party during the Weimar Republic.
<h2>Early years</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born on 10 May 1878 in 66 Köpenicker Straße in Southeast Berlin, the youngest of seven children.  His father worked as a beer bottler and distributor, and also ran a small bar out of the family home, as well as renting rooms for extra money.  The family was lower middle class, but relatively well-off for the neighbourhood, and had sufficient funds to provide firstnameplaceholder with a high-quality education.[1]
secondnameplaceholder was an excellent student, particularly excelling in German literature and poetry. At the age of 16, he joined the Andreas Gymnasium to study. His parents brought him up to have an interest in books — he was especially passionate about history, with his teacher, Mr. Wolff, commenting that he had an "almost sickly taste in history." He took an interest in Napoleon and Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, whom he later wrote about in his work 1924: Goethe und Napoleon: ein Vortrag.[2] His mother, Mathilde, died in 1895. From December 1895, he wrote "Berlin letters" for the Dresdener Volks-Zeitung, often talking about politics and targeting Prussian conservatives. In an essay written when he left school, he noted that he would have enjoyed becoming a teacher, but he would only have been qualified to teach languages or the natural sciences, which were not his primary areas of interest.[3] Due to this, he enrolled in university.In April 1897, secondnameplaceholder enrolled at the University of Berlin, where he was convinced by a businessman to study political economy instead of literature.[4] During his university years, secondnameplaceholder also became active in the Burschenschaften movement of student fraternities, and became editor, in April 1898, of the Allgemeine Deutsche Universitäts-Zeitung, a newspaper run by Konrad Kuster, a leader in the liberal portion of the Burschenschaften. His editorials for the paper were often political, and dismissed most of the contemporary political parties as broken in one way or another.[5]  In these early writings, he set out views that combined liberalism with strident nationalism, a combination that would dominate his views for the rest of his life.[6] In 1898, secondnameplaceholder left the University of Berlin, transferring to the University of Leipzig so that he could pursue a doctorate. He studied history and international Law, and took literature courses. Influenced by Dr. Martin Kriele, he also took courses in economics. In March 1899, he stopped being an editor for the Allgemeine Deutsche Universitäts-Zeitung. He completed his studies in January 1901, submitting a thesis on the bottled beer industry in Berlin, which received a relatively high grade, but was a subject of mockery from colleagues.[7][8][9] secondnameplaceholder's doctoral supervisor was the economist Karl Bücher.[10]In 1902, secondnameplaceholder founded the Saxon Manufacturers' Association. In 1903 he married Käte Kleefeld (1883–1970), daughter of a wealthy Jewish Berlin businessman, and the sister of Kurt von Kleefeld, the last person in Germany to  be ennobled (in 1918). At that time he was also a member of Friedrich Naumann's National-Social Association. In 1906 he was elected to the Dresden town council. Though he had initially worked in trade associations, secondnameplaceholder soon became a leader of the National Liberal Party in Saxony. In 1907, he was elected to the Reichstag, where he soon became a close associate of party chairman Ernst Bassermann. However, his support of expanded social welfare programs did not sit well with some of the party's more conservative members, and he lost his post in the party's executive committee in 1912. Later that year he lost both his Reichstag and town council seats. He returned to business and founded the German-American Economic Association. In 1914 he returned to the Reichstag. He was exempted from war service due to poor health.  With Bassermann kept away from the Reichstag by either illness or military service, secondnameplaceholder soon became the National Liberals' de facto leader.  After Bassermann's death in 1917, secondnameplaceholder succeeded him as the party leader.
<h2>World War I</h2>
The evolution of his political ideas appears somewhat erratic. Initially, in the German Empire, secondnameplaceholder was associated with the left wing of the National Liberals. During World War I, he gradually moved to the right, expressing his support of the monarchy and Germany's expansionist goals. He was a vocal proponent of unrestricted submarine warfare.  However, he still favoured an expansion of the social welfare programme, and also supported an end to the restrictive Prussian franchise.[citation needed] In 1916, he visited Constantinople and learned about the Armenian genocide, writing in his diary: "Armenian reduction 1–11⁄2  million." secondnameplaceholder recommended the recall of the German ambassador, Paul Wolff Metternich, accusing him of being too sympathetic to Armenians.[11]When the Allies' peace terms became known, including a crushing burden of paying reparations for the war, Constantin Fehrenbach denounced them and claimed "the will to break the chains of slavery would be implanted" into a generation of Germans. secondnameplaceholder said of this speech: "He was inspired in that hour by God to say what was felt by the German people. His words, spoken under Fichte's portrait, the final words of which merged into “Deutschland, Deutschland über alles”, made it an unforgettably solemn hour. There was in that sense a kind of uplifting grandeur. The impression left on all was tremendous".[12]After the war, secondnameplaceholder briefly joined the German Democratic Party, formed from a merger of the Progressives with the left wing of the National Liberals. However, he was quickly expelled for his association with the right wing. He then gathered the main body of the old National Liberal Party—including most of its centre and right factions—into the German People's Party (German: Deutsche Volkspartei, DVP), with himself as chairman. Most of its support came from middle class and upper class Protestants. The DVP platform promoted Christian family values, secular education, lower tariffs, opposition to welfare spending and agrarian subsidies and hostility to "Marxism" (that is, the Communists, and also the Social Democrats).The DVP was initially seen, along with the German National People's Party, as part of the "national opposition" to the Weimar Republic, particularly for its grudging acceptance of democracy and its ambivalent attitude towards the Freikorps and the Kapp Putsch in 1920.  By late 1920, secondnameplaceholder gradually moved to cooperation with the parties of the left and centre — possibly in reaction to political murders like that of Walther Rathenau.  However, he remained a monarchist at heart.
<h2>Weimar Republic</h2>
On 13 August 1923, secondnameplaceholder was appointed chancellor and foreign minister of a grand coalition government in the so-called year of crises (1923). In social policy, a new system of binding arbitration was introduced in October 1923 in which an outside arbitrator had the final say in industrial disputes.[13]On the 26 September 1923, secondnameplaceholder announced the end to the passive resistance against the Occupation of the Ruhr by the French and Belgians, in tandem with an Article 48 (of the Weimar Constitution) state of emergency proclamation by President Ebert that lasted until February 1924.[14][15] In October 1923, the secondnameplaceholder government used Article 48 to replace the illegally elected SPD-Communist coalition government of Saxony on 29 October, and that of Thuringia on 6 November, by commissioners. By this time, secondnameplaceholder was convinced that accepting the republic and reaching an understanding with the Allies on the reparations issue was the only way for Germany to gain the breathing room it needed to rebuild its battered economy.[15] He also wished to recover the Rhineland, as he wrote to Wilhelm, the former German Crown Prince on 23 July 1923: "The most important objective of German politics is the liberation of German territory from French and Belgian occupation. First, we must remove the strangler from our throat".[16]Hyperinflation in the Weimar Republic reached its peak in November 1923.[17] Since Germany was no longer able to pay the striking workers, more and more money was printed, which finally led to hyperinflation. secondnameplaceholder introduced a new currency, the Rentenmark, to end hyperinflation. He also persuaded the French to pull back from the Ruhr in return for a promise that reparations payments would resume. That was part of his larger strategy of "fulfillment." Although he, like nearly every other German politician, cursed the Treaty of Versailles as a Diktat, he had come to believe that Germany would never win relief from its terms unless it made a good-faith effort to fulfill them. To his mind, this would convince the Allies that the reparations bill was truly beyond Germany's capacity .The effort paid off; the Allies began to take a look at reforming the reparations scheme.[18]In early November 1923, partly because of the reaction to the overthrowing of the SPD/KPD governments in Saxony and Thuringia, the Social Democrats withdrew from his reshuffled government and after a motion of confidence was voted down on 23 November 1923 secondnameplaceholder and his cabinet resigned.secondnameplaceholder remained as foreign minister in the government of his successor, Centrist Wilhelm Marx. He remained foreign minister for the rest of his life in eight successive governments ranging from the centre-right to the centre-left. As foreign minister, secondnameplaceholder had numerous achievements. His first notable achievement was the Dawes Plan of 1924, which reduced Germany's overall reparations commitment and reorganized the Reichsbank.After Sir Austen Chamberlain became British Foreign Secretary, he wanted a British guarantee to France and Belgium as the Anglo-American guarantee had fallen due to the United States' refusal to ratify the Treaty of Versailles. secondnameplaceholder later wrote: "Chamberlain had never been our friend. His first act was to attempt to restore the old Entente through a three-power alliance of England, France and Belgium, directed against Germany. German diplomacy faced a catastrophic situation".[19]secondnameplaceholder conceived the idea that Germany would guarantee her western borders and pledged never to invade Belgium and France again, along with a guarantee from Britain that they would come to Germany's aid if attacked by France. Germany was in no position at the time to attack, as secondnameplaceholder wrote to the Crown Prince: "The renunciation of a military conflict with France has only a theoretical significance, in so far as there is no possibility of a war with France".[20] secondnameplaceholder negotiated the Locarno Treaties with Britain, France, Italy, and Belgium. On the third day of negotiations secondnameplaceholder explained Germany's demands to the French Foreign Secretary, Aristide Briand. As secondnameplaceholder recorded, Briand "almost fell off his sofa, when he heard my explanations". secondnameplaceholder said that Germany alone should not make sacrifices for peace; European countries should cede colonies to Germany; the disarmament control commission should leave Germany; the Anglo-French occupation of the Rhineland should be ended; and Britain and France should disarm as Germany had done.[21] The Treaties were signed in October 1925 at Locarno. Germany officially recognized the post-World War I western border for the first time,[22] and was guaranteed peace with France, and promised admission to the League of Nations and evacuation of the last Allied occupation troops from the Rhineland.secondnameplaceholder was not willing to conclude a similar treaty with Poland: "There will be no Locarno of the east" he said in 1925. However in 1925 he did sign arbitration agreements with both Poland and Czechoslovakia to ensure that any future conflict would be settled by impartial arbitration, rather than by the use of force.  By 1929 his policy was “detente with Poland,” and strengthening good economic relationships. [23][24][25]After this reconciliation with the Versailles powers, secondnameplaceholder moved to improve relations with the Soviet Union. He said to Nikolay Krestinsky in June 1925, as recorded in his diary: "I had said I would not come to conclude a treaty with Russia so long as our political situation in the other direction was not cleared up, as I wanted to answer the question whether we had a treaty with Russia in the negative".[26] The Treaty of Berlin signed in April 1926 reaffirmed and strengthened the Rapallo Treaty of 1922. In September 1926, Germany was admitted to the League of Nations as permanent member of the Security Council. This was a sign that Germany was quickly becoming a normal state, and assured the Soviet Union of Germany's sincerity in the Treaty of Berlin.secondnameplaceholder was co-winner of the Nobel Peace Prize in 1926 for these achievements. firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's success owed much to his friendly personal character and his willingness to be pragmatic. He was close personal friends with many influential foreigners. The most noted was Briand, with whom he shared the Peace Prize.[27]secondnameplaceholder wrote to the Crown Prince: "All the questions which to-day preoccupy the German people can be transformed into as many vexations for the Entente by a skilful orator before the League of Nations". As Germany now had a veto on League resolutions, she could gain concessions from other countries on modifications on the Polish border or Anschluss with Austria, as other countries needed her vote. Germany could now act as "the spokesman of the whole German cultural community" and thereby provoke the German minorities in Czechoslovakia and Poland.[28]Germany signed the Kellogg-Briand Pact in August 1928. It renounced the use of violence to resolve international conflicts. Although secondnameplaceholder did not propose the pact, Germany's adherence convinced many people that Weimar Germany was a Germany that could be reasoned with. This new insight was instrumental in the Young Plan of February 1929 which led to more reductions in German reparations payment.secondnameplaceholder was not, however, in any sense pro-French. His main preoccupation was how to free Germany from the burden of reparations payments to France, imposed by the Treaty of Versailles. His strategy for this was to forge close economic ties with the United States. The U.S. was Germany's main source of money and raw materials, and one of Germany's largest export markets for manufactured goods. Germany's economic recovery was thus in the interests of the U.S., and gave the U.S. an incentive to help Germany resolve the reparations burden. The Dawes and Young plans were the result of this strategy.   New York bankers loaned large sums to Germany, which used the dollars to pay reparations to France and Britain, which in turn paid their war loans they owed to Washington.  secondnameplaceholder had a close relationship with Herbert Hoover, who was Secretary of Commerce in 1921-28 and President from 1929. This strategy worked remarkably well until it was derailed by the Great Depression after secondnameplaceholder's death.[29]During his period in the foreign ministry, secondnameplaceholder came more and more to accept the Republic, which he had at first rejected. By the mid-1920s, having contributed much to a (temporary) consolidation of the feeble democratic order, secondnameplaceholder was regarded as a Vernunftrepublikaner (republican by reason), someone who accepted the republic as the least of all evils but was in his heart still loyal to the monarchy. The conservative opposition criticized him for his supporting the republic and fulfilling too willingly the demands of the Western powers. Along with Matthias Erzberger and others, he was attacked as a Erfüllungspolitiker ("fulfillment politician"). Indeed, some of the more conservative members of his own People's Party never really trusted him.In 1925, when he first proposed an agreement with France, he made it clear that in doing so he intended to "gain a free hand to secure a peaceful change of the borders in the East and [...] concentrate on a later incorporation of German territories in the East".[30] In the same year, while Poland was in a state of political and economic crisis, secondnameplaceholder began a trade war against the country. secondnameplaceholder hoped for an escalation of the Polish crisis, which would enable Germany to regain territories ceded to Poland after World War I, and he wanted Germany to gain a larger market for its products there. So secondnameplaceholder refused to engage in any international cooperation that would have "prematurely" restabilized the Polish economy. In response to a British proposal, secondnameplaceholder wrote to the German ambassador in London: "[A] final and lasting recapitalization of Poland must be delayed until the country is ripe for a settlement of the border according to our wishes and until our own position is sufficiently strong". According to secondnameplaceholder's letter, there should be no settlement "until [Poland's] economic and financial distress has reached an extreme stage and reduced the entire Polish body politic to a state of powerlessness".[31] secondnameplaceholder hoped to annex Polish territories in Greater Poland, take over whole eastern Upper Silesia and parts of Central Silesia and the entire so called Polish Corridor. Besides waging economic war on Poland, Streseman funded extensive propaganda efforts and plotted to collaborate with Soviet Union against Polish statehood.[32]According to historianGordon Craig:secondnameplaceholder died of a stroke on 3 October 1929 at the age of 51. His gravesite is situated in the Luisenstadt Cemetery at Südstern in Berlin Kreuzberg, and includes work by the German sculptor Hugo Lederer.secondnameplaceholder and his wife Käte had two sons, Wolfgang, who later became intendant of the Berliner Philharmoniker, and Joachim secondnameplaceholder.secondnameplaceholder was a freemason initiated in the masonic lodge Frederick the Great (in German, Friedrich der Große) in Berlin in 1923. His masonic membership was generally known to his contemporaries and he was criticized by German nationalists as a "lodge politician".[34]
<h2>Fashion</h2>
secondnameplaceholder popularized the style of substituting a short dark lounge-suit jacket for a morning coat but otherwise wearing morning dress for men's day wear.  The look became so identified with secondnameplaceholder that such outfits are often called "secondnameplaceholders."Media related to firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder at Wikimedia Commons
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder Édouard secondnameplaceholder (20 December 1841 – 16 February 1932) was a French academic, educational bureaucrat, pacifist and Radical-Socialist (left liberal) politician. He presided over the League of Education from 1902 to 1906 and the Human Rights League (LDH) from 1914 to 1926.
In 1927, the Nobel Peace Prize was awarded to him jointly with Ludwig Quidde.
Philosopher and educator, he was Director of Primary Education. He was the author of a thesis on Sebastian Castellio, in whom he saw a "liberal Protestant" in his image.
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was the president of the National Association of Freethinkers . In 1905, he chaired the parliamentary committee to implement the separation of church and state.
Famous for his fight for secular education through the League of Education, he coined the term laïcité ("secularism").
<h2>Biography</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was a student at the Lycée Condorcet, then received his aggrégation in philosophy.
A historical figure of liberal Protestantism, he voluntarily went into exile in Switzerland under the Second Empire, from 1866 to 1870, because he refused to swear allegiance to the new government.
<h2>Career</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was a professor at what became the University of Neuchâtel. Beginning  in 1867, he attended three international conferences of the League of Peace and Freedom. At the last congress in Lausanne in 1869, he read a speech.  Meanwhile, he tried to put in place a liberal Protestant church, calling pastors Jules Steeg and Felix Pécaut.
After the announcement of the proclamation of the Republic, he returned to France and was actively involved in political and social initiatives of the municipality of 17th arrondissement.  In December 1870, he became head of the 17th arrondissement municipal orphanage, the first secular orphanage, which later became the Seine orphanage.
Refusing to teach philosophy because he was more willing to work for the poorest children, it was thanks to his friendship with the Minister of Public Instruction, Jules Simon, that he was appointed director of the Paris schools.  Concerned about the future of the children in the orphanage, he connected with the philanthropist Joseph Gabriel Prevost and placed the children in his Prévost orphanage in Cempuis.  In 1880, he appointed Paul Robin director of the orphanage.From 1879 to 1896, secondnameplaceholder was called by Jules Ferry, the successor of Jules Simon, the Directorate of Primary Education.  In 1890, he became professor of education at the Sorbonne.  He supervised the work of writing and designing the laws of secularism.  In 1905, he was the chairman of the parliamentary committee that wrote the text of the law of separation of church and state.
In 1898, as a supporter of Alfred Dreyfus, secondnameplaceholder participated in the creation of the French League for Human Rights, which he was president from 1913 to 1926.  Deputy of the Seine from 1902 to 1914, then from 1919 to 1924, he was a particularly strong advocate of vocational education and compulsory voting rights for women.secondnameplaceholder was sympathetic to women's suffrage, unlike most Radicals, and was rapporteur of the committee that examined the proposal of Paul Dussaussoy for limited women's suffrage.[2]
The bill was pushed to the bottom of the agenda of the committee on voting rules.[2]
The President of the committee judged it important to separate the question of votes for women from the more important question of proportional representation, which was considered first.
secondnameplaceholder submitted a separate report on women's suffrage on 16 July 1909, some months after Dussaussoy's death.[3]
secondnameplaceholder's report supported the proposal.[4]In 1914 and during the World War I, secondnameplaceholder was one of the patriots and defended the Sacred Union. [5] He was elected again from 1919 to 1924, and worked for Franco-German reconciliation, especially after the occupation of the Ruhr in 1923. An early supporter of the League of Nations, he invited German pacifists to Paris and travels to Berlin.[6]firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was also the prime contractor for a remarkable editorial project, the Dictionnaire de pédagogie et d'instruction primaire, for the writing of which he surrounded himself with more than 350 collaborators, and more particularly with James Guillaume who became its editor-in-chief. The first edition was published by Hachette between 1882 and 1887. A new edition was published in 1911.  Not limited to the role of editorial responsibility, secondnameplaceholder wrote entries such as Secularism, Intuition, and Prayer.[7]  His dictionary is considered the "Bible" of the secular, republican school system, and introduced the concept of a secular religious replacement.  The Minister of Education, Vincent Peillon, was one of his disciples.
A supporter from the beginning of the League of Nations, secondnameplaceholder then devoted himself to Franco-German rapprochement, especially after the occupation of the Ruhr in 1923, inviting German pacifists to Paris and traveling to Berlin.  He received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1927 with the German professor Ludwig Quidde.[1]
(!!)Article(!/!)
Born into a wealthy bourgeois merchant family, secondnameplaceholder grew up in Bremen, read history and also got involved in the activities of the German Peace Society (Deutsche Friedensgesellschaft). In his younger years he had already opposed Bismarck's policies. In 1881 he received his PhD at the University of Göttingen. In 1894 secondnameplaceholder published a 17-page pamphlet entitled Caligula. Eine Studie über römischen Caesarenwahnsinn (Caligula: A Study of Imperial Insanity). Containing 79 footnotes, the short essay is exclusively about the Roman Empire of the 1st century AD. However, secondnameplaceholder drew an implicit parallel between the Roman Emperor Caligula and Wilhelm II, de facto accusing both rulers of megalomania. The author had insisted on publishing his pamphlet under his real name, which effectively ended his academic career as a historian when, in some periodical, a short review explained the parallels which otherwise might have gone unnoticed. After he made a derogatory comment on a new medal in honour of William I, German Emperor, German Emperor from 1871 to 1888, he was criminally convicted of lèse majesté, and sentenced to three months in prison, which he served in Stadelheim Prison.After the end of the First World War, secondnameplaceholder, like most other Germans, vehemently opposed the Treaty of Versailles but for different reasons from German militarists, who hated mainly the vast restrictions laid upon the German armed forces and the impending economic disaster that would be caused by payment of the high reparations that were decreed. He and other German pacifists thought ahead and hoped that US President Woodrow Wilson would win the day, pointing out that such severe conditions would already sow the seeds of a new war:When Hitler came to power in 1933, secondnameplaceholder escaped to Switzerland, finally settling down in Geneva for the rest of his days. He remained an optimist throughout his life. Aged 76, he published his essay "Landfriede und Weltfriede" (1934) at a time when militarism was again on the rise, believing that modern technology might serve as a deterrent from war:firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder died in his Swiss exile in 1941, aged 82.
<h2>Politics and the pacifist movement</h2>
The fortune inherited by secondnameplaceholder allowed him to devote himself entirely to politics. In 1893, he joined the German People's Party (DtVP) founded in 1868, party that met his anti-militarist, anti-Prussian, democratic and pacifist expectations.[1]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder Billings Kellogg (December 22, 1856 – December 21, 1937) was an American lawyer, politician, and statesman who served in the U.S. Senate and as U.S. Secretary of State.[1]  He co-authored the Kellogg–Briand Pact, for which he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1929.[2]
<h2>Early life and career</h2>
Kellogg was born in Potsdam, New York, on December 22, 1856, the son of Abigail (Billings) and Asa Farnsworth Kellogg.[3] His family moved to Minnesota in 1865.[4]Kellogg read law and began practicing law in Rochester, Minnesota, in 1877.  He served as city attorney of Rochester 1878–1881 and county attorney for Olmsted County, Minnesota, from 1882 to 1887. He moved to St. Paul, Minnesota, in 1886.[4]In 1905, Kellogg joined the federal government when Theodore Roosevelt asked Kellogg to prosecute a federal antitrust case.[5] In 1906, Kellogg was appointed special counsel to the Interstate Commerce Commission for its investigation of E. H. Harriman. In 1908, he was appointed to lead the federal prosecution against Union Pacific Railroad, under the Sherman Antitrust Act.[6][7][8] His most important case was Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey v. United States, 221 U.S. 1 (1911).  Following this successful prosecution, he was elected president of the American Bar Association (1912–1913).In 1907, he was elected as a Compatriot of the Minnesota Society of the Sons of the American Revolution.[9]In 1916, Kellogg was elected as a Republican to the United States Senate from Minnesota and served from March 4, 1917 to March 4, 1923 in the 65th, 66th, and 67th Congresses. During the ratification battle for the Treaty of Versailles, he was one of the few Republicans who supported ratification.  He lost his re-election bid in 1922 and, in 1923, he was a delegate to the Fifth International Conference of American States at Santiago, Chile.[4]In 1924, he was appointed by President Calvin Coolidge as Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary to Great Britain,[10] serving from January 14, 1924 to February 10, 1925.  He succeeded George Brinton McClellan Harvey who served under Warren G. Harding and was succeeded by Alanson B. Houghton so that Kellogg could assume the role of Secretary of State.[4]
<h2>Secretary of State</h2>
From 1925 to 1929, he served as the United States Secretary of State in the Cabinet of President Coolidge.[11]  In 1928, he was awarded the Freedom of the City in Dublin, Ireland and in 1929 the government of France made him a member of the Legion of Honour.[4]As Secretary of State, he was responsible for improving U.S.–Mexican relations and helping to resolve the long-standing Tacna–Arica controversy between Peru and Chile.  His most significant accomplishment, however, was the Kellogg–Briand Pact, signed in 1928. Proposed by its other namesake, French foreign minister Aristide Briand, the treaty intended to provide for "the renunciation of war as an instrument of national policy." He was awarded the 1929 Nobel Peace Prize in recognition.[4][12][13]He was associate judge of the Permanent Court of International Justice from 1930 to 1935.[14][15][16][17]Kellogg was self-conscious about his lack of academic credentials; he attended a one-room country school and dropped out at age 14. He never attended high school, college or law school.  His only advanced training came from clerking in a private lawyer's office. Kellogg grew up in a poor farm in Minnesota, and lacked a commanding presence or the sophistication to deal with the aristocrats who dominated European diplomacy. As Secretary of State, his main focus was Latin America, where he dealt with brutal but unsophisticated strongmen.  His staff provided the ideas, and they appreciated that he was always open, candid, and easy to communicate with. He helped end the battle between the Mexican government and the Catholic Church, but failed to resolve the dispute over ownership of the oil reserves. In the Far East,  he followed the advice of Nelson Johnson, the new chief of the Division of Far Eastern Affairs. They favored China and protected it from threats from Japan. They successfully negotiated tariff reform with China, thereby giving enhanced status to the Kuomintang and helping get rid of the unequal treaties.[18] As for Europe he was primarily interested with expanding the limitations on naval armaments that been established by the Washington Treaty; he made little progress. Kellogg gained international fame, and the Nobel Peace Prize, with the Kellogg–Briand Pact. It was endorsed by nearly every nation and made starting a war a punishable criminal action.  It formed the legal basis for the trial and execution of German and Japanese war leaders after 1945.[19]
<h2>Personal life</h2>
In 1886, Kellogg was married to Clara May Cook (1861–1942), the daughter of George Clinton Cook (1828–1901) and Elizabeth (née Burns) Cook (1838–1908).[20]In 1880, he became a member of the Masonic Lodge Rochester No. 21, where he received the degrees of freemasonry on April 1, April 19, and May 3.[21]He died from pneumonia, following a stroke, on the eve of his 81st birthday in St. Paul.[1] He was buried at the Chapel of St. Joseph of Arimathea in Washington National Cathedral, Washington, D.C.[4]In 1937, he endowed the Kellogg Foundation for Education in International Relations at Carleton College, where he was a trustee.[22]  His house in St. Paul, the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder House was listed as a National Historic Landmark in 1976.[23]The following were named in his honor:firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's papers are available for research use at the Minnesota Historical Society.  They include correspondence and miscellaneous papers, State Department duplicates, news clippings scrapbooks, awards, floor plans, honorary degrees, maps, memorials and memoranda.[25]
<h2>See also</h2>

<h2>Biography</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born in the village of Trönö in Söderhamn Municipality, Gävleborg County. His father was a parish priest. He enrolled at Uppsala University in 1883. Although not initially convinced what he wanted to study, he eventually decided to follow in his father's footsteps. On returning from a journey to the U.S., he was ordained priest in 1893. During the years 1892 and 1893, secondnameplaceholder was first vice president and then president of the Uppsala Student Union.[2]From 1894 until 1901, he held a ministry at the Swedish Embassy in Paris, where his congregation included both Alfred Nobel (1833–1896) and August Strindberg (1849–1912). In 1897, he conducted the memorial service following the death of Alfred Nobel. From 1901 to 1914, secondnameplaceholder held a chair in the School of Theology at Uppsala University and from 1912 to 1914 was also a professor of Religious studies at Leipzig University. In 1914, he was elected as Archbishop of Uppsala, the head of the Lutheran church in Sweden. During the First World War, he called on all Christian leaders to work for peace and justice while working to alleviate the conditions of prisoners of war and refugees.[3]He believed that church unity had the specific purpose of presenting the gospel to the world and that the messages of Jesus were relevant to social life. His leadership of the Christian "Life and Work" movement in the 1920s has led him to be recognised as one of the principal founders of the ecumenical movement. He had begun the movement toward intercommunion between the Church of Sweden and the Church of England and was a close associate of the English ecumenist George Bell (1883–1958), Dean of Canterbury, Bishop of Chichester. He was instrumental in chairing the World Conference of Life and Work in Stockholm, in 1925. In 1930 he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.[2][4]
<h2>Early life</h2>
Born in Cedarville, Illinois,[14] firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was the youngest of eight children born into a prosperous northern Illinois family of English-American descent which traced back to colonial Pennsylvania.[15] By the time secondnameplaceholder was eight, four of her siblings had died: three in infancy and one at age 16.[16] In 1863, when secondnameplaceholder was two years old, her mother, Sarah secondnameplaceholder (née Weber), died while pregnant with her ninth child. Thereafter secondnameplaceholder was cared for mostly by her older sisters.[15][17][18]secondnameplaceholder spent her childhood playing outdoors, reading indoors, and attending Sunday school. When she was four she contracted tuberculosis of the spine, known as Potts's disease, which caused a curvature in her spine and lifelong health problems. This made it complicated as a child to function with the other children, considering she had a limp and could not run as well.[19] As a child, she thought she was ugly and later remembered wanting not to embarrass her father, when he was dressed in his Sunday best, by walking down the street with him.[20]secondnameplaceholder adored her father, John H. secondnameplaceholder, when she was a child, as she made clear in the stories in her memoir, Twenty Years at Hull House (1910).[21] He was a founding member of the Illinois Republican Party, served as an Illinois State Senator (1855–70), and supported his friend Abraham Lincoln in his candidacies for senator (1854) and the presidency (1860). He kept a letter from Lincoln in his desk, and secondnameplaceholder loved to look at it as a child.[22] Her father was an agricultural businessman with large timber, cattle, and agricultural holdings; flour and timber mills and a wool factory. He was the president of The Second National Bank of Freeport. He remarried in 1868 when secondnameplaceholder was eight years old. His second wife was Anna Hosteler Haldeman, the widow of a miller in Freeport.[21]During her childhood, secondnameplaceholder had big dreams of doing something useful in the world. As a voracious reader, she became interested in the poor from her reading of Dickens. Inspired by her mother's kindness to the Cedarville poor, she decided to become a doctor so that she could live and work among the poor. It was a vague idea nurtured by literary fiction.secondnameplaceholder's father encouraged her to pursue higher education but close to home. She was eager to attend the new college for women, Smith College in Massachusetts; but her father required her to attend nearby Rockford Female Seminary (now Rockford University), in Rockford, Illinois.[14] After graduating from Rockford in 1881,[14] with a collegiate certificate and membership in Phi Beta Kappa, she still hoped to attend Smith to earn a proper B.A. That summer, her father died unexpectedly from a sudden case of appendicitis. Each child inherited roughly $50,000 (equivalent to $1.34 million in 2016).That fall, secondnameplaceholder, her sister Alice, Alice's husband Harry, and their stepmother, Anna Haldeman secondnameplaceholder, moved to Philadelphia so that the three young people could pursue medical educations. Harry was already trained in medicine and did further studies at the University of Pennsylvania. firstnameplaceholder and Alice completed their first year of medical school at the Woman's Medical College of Philadelphia,[14] but firstnameplaceholder's health problems, a spinal operation[14] and a nervous breakdown prevented her from completing the degree. She was filled with sadness at her failure. Her stepmother Anna was also ill, so the entire family canceled their plans to stay two years and returned to Cedarville.[23]The following fall her brother-in-law Harry performed surgery on her back, to straighten it. He then advised that she not pursue studies but, instead, travel. In August 1883, she set off for a two-year tour of Europe with her stepmother, traveling some of the time with friends and family who joined them. secondnameplaceholder decided that she did not have to become a doctor to be able to help the poor.[24]Upon her return home in June 1887, she lived with her stepmother in Cedarville and spent winters with her in Baltimore. secondnameplaceholder, still filled with vague ambition, sank into depression, unsure of her future and feeling useless leading the conventional life expected of a well-to-do young woman. She wrote long letters to her friend from Rockford Seminary, Ellen Gates Starr, mostly about Christianity and books but sometimes about her despair.[25]Her nephew was James Weber Linn (1876–1939) who taught English at the University of Chicago and served in the Illinois General Assembly. Linn also wrote books and newspaper articles.[26]
<h2>Settlement house</h2>
Meanwhile, secondnameplaceholder gathered inspiration from what she read. Fascinated by the early Christians and Tolstoy's book My Religion, she was baptized a Christian in the Cedarville Presbyterian Church, in the summer of 1886.[27] Reading Giuseppe Mazzini's Duties of Man, she began to be inspired by the idea of democracy as a social ideal. Yet she felt confused about her role as a woman. John Stuart Mill's The Subjection of Women made her question the social pressures on a woman to marry and devote her life to family.[28]In the summer of 1887, secondnameplaceholder read in a magazine about the new idea of starting a settlement house. She decided to visit the world's first, Toynbee Hall, in London. She and several friends, including Ellen Gates Starr, traveled in Europe from December 1887 through the summer of 1888. After watching a bullfight in Madrid, fascinated by what she saw as an exotic tradition, secondnameplaceholder condemned this fascination and her inability to feel outraged at the suffering of the horses and bulls. At first, secondnameplaceholder told no one about her dream to start a settlement house; but, she felt increasingly guilty for not acting on her dream.[29] Believing that sharing her dream might help her to act on it, she told Ellen Gates Starr. Starr loved the idea and agreed to join secondnameplaceholder in starting a settlement house.[30]secondnameplaceholder and another friend traveled to London without Starr, who was busy.[31] Visiting Toynbee Hall, secondnameplaceholder was enchanted. She described it as "a community of University men who live there, have their recreation clubs and society all among the poor people, yet, in the same style in which they would live in their own circle. It is so free of 'professional doing good,' so unaffectedly sincere and so productive of good results in its classes and libraries seems perfectly ideal." secondnameplaceholder's dream of the classes mingling socially to mutual benefit, as they had in early Christian circles seemed embodied in the new type of institution.[32]The settlement house as secondnameplaceholder discovered was a space within which unexpected cultural connections could be made and where the narrow boundaries of culture, class, and education could be expanded. They doubled as community arts centers and social service facilities. They laid the foundations for American civil society, a neutral space within which different communities and ideologies could learn from each other and seek common grounds for collective action. The role of the settlement house was an "unending effort to make culture and 'the issue of things' go together." The unending effort was the story of her own life, a struggle to reinvigorate her own culture by reconnecting with diversity and conflict of the immigrant communities in America's cities and with the necessities of social reform.[33]
<h2>Hull House</h2>
In 1889[34] secondnameplaceholder and her college friend and paramour Ellen Gates Starr[35] co-founded Hull House, a settlement house in Chicago. The run-down mansion had been built by Charles Hull in 1856 and needed repairs and upgrading. secondnameplaceholder at first paid for all of the capital expenses (repairing the roof of the porch, repainting the rooms, buying furniture) and most of the operating costs. However gifts from individuals supported the House beginning in its first year and secondnameplaceholder was able to reduce the proportion of her contributions, although the annual budget grew rapidly. A number of wealthy women became important long-term donors to the House, including Helen Culver, who managed her first cousin Charles Hull's estate, and who eventually allowed the contributors to use the house rent-free. Other contributors were Louise DeKoven Bowen, Mary Rozet Smith, Mary Wilmarth, and others.[36][37]secondnameplaceholder and Starr were the first two occupants of the house, which would later become the residence of about 25 women. At its height,[38] Hull House was visited each week by some 2,000 people. Hull House was a center for research, empirical analysis, study, and debate, as well as a pragmatic center for living in and establishing good relations with the neighborhood. Among the aims of Hull House was to give privileged, educated young people contact with the real life of the majority of the population.[11] Residents of Hull House conducted investigations on housing, midwifery, fatigue, tuberculosis, typhoid, garbage collection, cocaine, and truancy. The core Hull House residents were well-educated women bound together by their commitment to labour unions, the National Consumers League and the suffrage movement.[11] Dr. Harriett Alleyne Rice joined Hull House to provide medical treatment for poor families.[39] Its facilities included a night school for adults, clubs for older children, a public kitchen, an art gallery, a gym, a girls' club, a bathhouse, a book bindery, a music school, a drama group and a theater, apartments, a library, meeting rooms for discussion, clubs, an employment bureau, and a lunchroom.[40] Her adult night school was a forerunner of the continuing education classes offered by many universities today. In addition to making available social services and cultural events for the largely immigrant population of the neighborhood, Hull House afforded an opportunity for young social workers to acquire training. Eventually, Hull House became a 13-building settlement complex, which included a playground and a summer camp (known as Bowen Country Club).One aspect of the Hull House that was very important to firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was the Art Program. The art program at Hull House allowed secondnameplaceholder to challenge the system of industrialized education, which "fitted" the individual to a specific job or position. She wanted the house to provide a space, time and tools to encourage people to think independently. She saw art as the key to unlocking the diversity of the city through collective interaction, mutual self-discovery, recreation and the imagination. Art was integral to her vision of community, disrupting fixed ideas and stimulating the diversity and interaction on which a healthy society depends, based on a continual rewriting of cultural identities through variation and interculturalism.[40]With funding from Edward Butler, secondnameplaceholder opened an art exhibition and studio space as one of the first additions to Hull House. On the first floor of the new addition there was a branch of the Chicago Public Library, and the second was the Butler Art Gallery, which featured recreations of famous artwork as well as the work of local artists. Studio space within the art gallery provided both Hull House residents and the entire community with the opportunity to take art classes or to come in and hone their craft whenever they liked. As Hull House grew, and the relationship with the neighborhood deepened, that opportunity became less of a comfort to the poor and more of an outlet of expression and exchange of different cultures and diverse communities. Art and culture was becoming a bigger and more important part of the lives of immigrants within the 19th ward, and soon children caught on to the trend. These working-class children were offered instruction in all forms and levels of art. Places such as the Butler Art Gallery or the Bowen Country Club often hosted these classes, but more informal lessons would often be taught outdoors. secondnameplaceholder, with the help of Ellen Gates Starr, founded the Chicago Public School Art Society (CPSAS) in response to the positive reaction the art classes for children caused. The CPSAS provided public schools with reproductions of world-renowned pieces of art, hired artists to teach children how to create art, and also took the students on field trips to Chicago's many art museums.[41]The Hull House neighborhood was a mix of European ethnic groups that had immigrated to Chicago around the start of the 20th century. That mix was the ground where Hull House's inner social and philanthropic elitists tested their theories and challenged the establishment. The ethnic mix is recorded by the Bethlehem-Howard Neighborhood Center: "Germans and Jews resided south of that inner core (south of Twelfth Street) ... The Greek delta formed by Harrison, Halsted Street, and Blue Island Streets served as a buffer to the Irish residing to the north and the French Canadians to the northwest."[42] Italians resided within the inner core of the Hull House Neighborhood ... from the river on the east end, on out to the western ends of what came to be known as Little Italy.[43] Greeks and Jews, along with the remnants of other immigrant groups, began their exodus from the neighborhood in the early 20th century. Only Italians continued as an intact and thriving community through the Great Depression, World War II, and well beyond the ultimate demise of Hull House proper in 1963.[44]Hull House became America's best known settlement house. secondnameplaceholder used it to generate system-directed change, on the principle that to keep families safe, community and societal conditions had to be improved.[45] The neighborhood was controlled by local political bosses.Starr and secondnameplaceholder developed three "ethical principles" for social settlements: "to teach by example, to practice cooperation, and to practice social democracy, that is, egalitarian, or democratic, social relations across class lines."[46] Thus Hull House offered a comprehensive program of civic, cultural, recreational, and educational activities and attracted admiring visitors from all over the world, including William Lyon Mackenzie King, a graduate student from Harvard University who later became prime minister of Canada. In the 1890s Julia Lathrop, Florence Kelley, and other residents of the house made it a world center of social reform activity. Hull House used the latest methodology (pioneering in statistical mapping) to study overcrowding, truancy, typhoid fever, cocaine, children's reading, newsboys, infant mortality, and midwifery. Starting with efforts to improve the immediate neighborhood, the Hull House group became involved in city and statewide campaigns for better housing, improvements in public welfare, stricter child-labor laws, and protection of working women. secondnameplaceholder brought in prominent visitors from around the world and had close links with leading Chicago intellectuals and philanthropists. In 1912, she helped start the new Progressive Party and supported the presidential campaign of Theodore Roosevelt."secondnameplaceholder' philosophy combined feminist sensibilities with an unwavering commitment to social improvement through cooperative efforts. Although she sympathized with feminists, socialists, and pacifists, secondnameplaceholder refused to be labeled. This refusal was pragmatic rather than ideological."[47]Hull House stressed the importance of the role of children in the Americanization process of new immigrants.  This philosophy also fostered the play movement and the research and service fields of leisure, youth, and human services. secondnameplaceholder argued in The Spirit of Youth and the City Streets (1909) that play and recreation programs are needed because cities are destroying the spirit of youth. Hull House featured multiple programs in art and drama, kindergarten classes, boys' and girls' clubs, language classes, reading groups, college extension courses, along with public baths, a gymnasium, a labor museum and playground, all within a free-speech atmosphere. They were all designed to foster democratic cooperation, collective action and downplay individualism. She helped pass the first model tenement code and the first factory laws.Along with her colleagues from Hull House, in 1901 firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder founded what would become the Juvenile Protective Association. JPA provided the first probation officers for the first Juvenile Court in the United States until this became a government function. From 1907 until the 1940s, JPA engaged in many studies examining such subjects as racism, child labor and exploitation, drug abuse and prostitution in Chicago and their effects on child development. Through the years, their mission has now become improving the social and emotional well being and functioning of vulnerable children so they can reach their fullest potential at home, in school, and in their communities.[48]secondnameplaceholder and her colleagues documented the communal geography of typhoid fever and reported that poor workers were bearing the brunt of the illness. She identified the political corruption and business avarice that caused the city bureaucracy to ignore health, sanitation, and building codes. Linking environmental justice and municipal reform, she eventually defeated the bosses and fostered a more equitable distribution of city services and modernized inspection practices.[49] secondnameplaceholder spoke of the "undoubted powers of public recreation to bring together the classes of a community in the keeping them apart."[50] secondnameplaceholder worked with the Chicago Board of Health and served as the first vice-president of the Playground Association of America.In 1912, secondnameplaceholder published  "A New Conscience and Ancient Evil", about prostitution. This book was extremely popular because it was published during the moral panic over "white slavery" (forced prostitution).[51] secondnameplaceholder believed that prostitution was a result of kidnapping only.[52] Her book later inspired Stella Wynne Herron's 1916 short story Shoes, which Lois Weber adapted into a groundbreaking 1916 film of the same name.[53]secondnameplaceholder and her colleagues originally intended Hull House as a transmission device to bring the values of the college-educated high culture to the masses, including the Efficiency Movement, a major movement in industrial nations in the early 20th century that sought to identify and eliminate waste in the economy and society, and to develop and implement best practices.[54]  However, over time, the focus changed from bringing art and culture to the neighborhood (as evidenced in the construction of the Butler Building) to responding to the needs of the community by providing childcare, educational opportunities, and large meeting spaces. Hull House became more than a proving ground for the new generation of college-educated, professional women: it also became part of the community in which it was founded, and its development reveals a shared history.[55]secondnameplaceholder called on women, especially middle class women with leisure time and energy as well as rich philanthropists, to exercise their civic duty to become involved in municipal affairs as a matter of "civic housekeeping."  secondnameplaceholder thereby enlarged the concept of civic duty to include roles for women beyond motherhood (which involved child rearing). Women's lives revolved around "responsibility, care, and obligation," which represented the source of women's power.[56] This notion provided the foundation for the municipal or civil housekeeping role that secondnameplaceholder defined and gave added weight to the women's suffrage movement that secondnameplaceholder supported. secondnameplaceholder argued that women, as opposed to men, were trained in the delicate matters of human welfare and needed to build upon their traditional roles of housekeeping to be civic housekeepers. Enlarged housekeeping duties involved reform efforts regarding poisonous sewage, impure milk (which often carried tuberculosis), smoke-laden air, and unsafe factory conditions. secondnameplaceholder led the "garbage wars"; in 1894 she became the first woman appointed as sanitary inspector of Chicago's 19th Ward. With the help of the Hull House Women's Club, within a year over 1,000 health department violations were reported to city council and garbage collection reduced death and disease.[57]secondnameplaceholder had long discussions with philosopher John Dewey in which they redefined democracy in terms of pragmatism and civic activism, with an emphasis more on duty and less on rights.[58] The two leading perspectives that distinguished secondnameplaceholder and her coalition from the modernizers more concerned with efficiency were the need to extend to social and economic life the democratic structures and practices that had been limited to the political sphere, as in secondnameplaceholder's programmatic support of trade unions and second, their call for a new social ethic to supplant the individualist outlook as being no longer adequate in modern society.[59]secondnameplaceholder's construction of womanhood involved daughterhood, sexuality, wifehood, and motherhood. In both of her autobiographical volumes, Twenty Years at Hull-House (1910) and The Second Twenty Years at Hull-House (1930), secondnameplaceholder's gender constructions parallel the Progressive-Era ideology she championed. In A New Conscience and an Ancient Evil (1912) she dissected the social pathology of sex slavery, prostitution and other sexual behaviors among working class women in American industrial centers from 1890–1910. secondnameplaceholder's autobiographical persona manifests her ideology and supports her popularized public activist persona as the "Mother of Social Work," in the sense that she represents herself as a celibate matron who served the suffering immigrant masses through Hull House, as if they were her own children. Although not a mother herself, secondnameplaceholder became the "mother to the nation," identified with motherhood in the sense of protective care of her people.[60]
<h2>Teaching</h2>
secondnameplaceholder kept up her heavy schedule of public lectures around the country, especially at college campuses.[61] In addition, she offered college courses through the Extension Division of the University of Chicago.[62] She declined offers from the university to become directly affiliated with it, including an offer from Albion Small, chair of the Department of Sociology, of a graduate faculty position. She declined in order to maintain her independent role outside of academia. Her goal was to teach adults not enrolled in formal academic institutions, because of their poverty and/or lack of credentials. Furthermore, she wanted no university controls over her political activism.[63]secondnameplaceholder was a charter member of the American Sociological Society, founded in 1905. She gave papers to it in 1912, 1915, and 1919. She was the most prominent woman member during her lifetime.
<h2>Relationships</h2>
Generally, secondnameplaceholder was close to a wide set of other women and was very good at eliciting their involvement from different classes in Hull House's programs. Nevertheless, throughout her life secondnameplaceholder did have romantic relationships with a few of these women, including Mary Rozet Smith and Ellen Starr. Her relationships offered her the time and energy to pursue her social work while being supported emotionally and romantically. From her exclusively romantic relationships with women, she would most likely be described as a lesbian in contemporary terms, similar to many leading figures in the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom of the time.[64]Her first romantic partner was Ellen Starr, with whom she founded Hull House, who she met when both were students at Rockford Female Seminary. In 1889, the two visited Toynbee Hall together and started their settlement house project, purchasing a house in Chicago.[65]Her second romantic partner was Mary Rozet Smith, who was wealthy and supported secondnameplaceholder's work at Hull House, and with whom she shared a house.[66] Historian Lilian Faderman wrote that firstnameplaceholder was in love and she addressed Mary as "My Ever Dear", "Darling" and "Dearest One", and concluded that they shared the intimacy of a married couple. They remained together until 1934, when Mary died of pneumonia, after 40 years together.[67]
It was said that, "Mary Smith became and always remained the highest and clearest note in the music that was firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder' personal life".[68] Together they owned a summer house in Bar Harbor, Maine. When apart, they would write to each other at least once a day – sometimes twice. secondnameplaceholder would write to Smith, "I miss you dreadfully and am yours 'til death".[69] The letters also show that the women saw themselves as a married couple: "There is reason in the habit of married folks keeping together," secondnameplaceholder wrote to Smith.[70]
<h2>Religion and religious motives</h2>
secondnameplaceholder's religious beliefs were shaped by her wide reading and life experience.[71] She saw her settlement work as part of the "social Christian" movement.[72] secondnameplaceholder learned about social Christianity from the co-founders of Toynbee Hall, Samuel and Henrietta Barnett. The Barnetts held a great interest in converting others to Christianity, but they believed that Christians should be more engaged with the world and, in the words of one of the leaders of the social Christian movement in England, W. H. Fremantle, "imbue all human relations with the spirit of Christ's self-renouncing love".According to Christie and Gauvreau (2001), while the Christian settlement houses sought to Christianize, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder "had come to epitomize the force of secular humanism." Her image was, however, "reinvented" by the Christian churches.[73]According to Joslin (2004), "The new humanism, as [secondnameplaceholder] interprets it comes from a secular, and not a religious, pattern of belief".[74]According to the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Hull-House Museum, "Some social settlements were linked to religious institutions. Others, like Hull-House [co-founded by secondnameplaceholder], were secular."[75]Hilda Satt Polacheck, a former resident of Hull House, stated that secondnameplaceholder firmly believed in religious freedom and bringing people of all faiths into the social, secular fold of Hull House. The one exception, she notes, was the annual Christmas Party, although secondnameplaceholder left the religious side to the church.[76]
<h2>Politics</h2>
In 1898, secondnameplaceholder joined the Anti-Imperialist League, in opposition to the U.S. annexation of the Philippines. A staunch supporter of the Progressive Party, she nominated Theodore Roosevelt for the presidency during the Party Convention, held in Chicago in August 1912.[77] She signed up on the party platform, even though it called for building more battleships. She went on to speak and campaign extensively for Roosevelt's 1912 presidential campaign.In January 1915, she became involved in the Woman's Peace Party and was elected national chairman.[14][78] secondnameplaceholder was invited by European women peace activists to preside over the International Congress of Women in The Hague, 28–30 April 1915,[14] and was chosen to head the commission to find an end to the war. This included meeting ten leaders in neutral countries as well as those at war to discuss mediation. This was the first significant international effort against the war. secondnameplaceholder, along with co-delegates Emily Balch and Alice Hamilton, documented their experiences of this venture, published as a book, Women at The Hague (University of Illinois).[79]In her journal, Balch recorded her impression of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (April 1915):secondnameplaceholder was elected president of the International Committee of Women for a Permanent Peace, established to continue the work of the Hague Congress, at a conference in 1919 in Zurich, Switzerland. The International Committee developed into the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom (WILPF).[14][80] secondnameplaceholder continued as president, a position that entailed frequent travel to Europe and Asia.In 1917, she also became a member of the Fellowship of Reconciliation USA (American branch of the International Fellowship of Reconciliation founded in 1919) and was a member of the Fellowship Council until 1933.[81] When the US joined the war in 1917, secondnameplaceholder started to be strongly criticized. She faced increasingly harsh rebukes and criticism as a pacifist. Her 1915 speech on pacifism at Carnegie Hall received negative coverage by newspapers such as The New York Times, which branded her as unpatriotic.[82][83] Later, during her travels, she spent time meeting with a wide variety of diplomats and civic leaders and reiterating her Victorian belief in women's special mission to preserve peace. Recognition of these efforts came with the award of the Nobel Peace Prize to secondnameplaceholder in 1931.[84] As the first U.S. woman to win the prize, secondnameplaceholder was applauded for her "expression of an essentially American democracy."[85] She donated her share of the prize money to the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom.[14]secondnameplaceholder was a major synthesizing figure in the domestic and international peace movements, serving as both a figurehead and leading theoretician; she was influenced especially by Russian novelist Leo Tolstoy and by the pragmatism of philosophers John Dewey and George Herbert Mead.[86] She envisioned democracy, social justice and peace as mutually reinforcing; they all had to advance together to achieve any one. secondnameplaceholder became an anti-war activist from 1899, as part of the anti-imperialist movement that followed the Spanish–American War. Her book Newer Ideals of Peace[87] (1907) reshaped the peace movement worldwide to include ideals of social justice. She recruited social justice reformers like Alice Hamilton, Lillian Wald, Florence Kelley, and Emily Greene Balch to join her in the new international women's peace movement after 1914. secondnameplaceholder's work came to fruition after World War I, when major institutional bodies began to link peace with social justice and probe the underlying causes of war and conflict.[88]In 1899 and 1907, world leaders sought peace by convening an innovative and influential peace conference at The Hague. These conferences produced Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907. A 1914 conference was canceled due to World War I. The void was filled by an unofficial conference convened by Women at the Hague. At the time, both the US and The Netherlands were neutral. firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder chaired this pathbreaking International Congress of Women at the Hague, which included almost 1,200 participants from 12 warring and neutral countries.[89] Their goal was to develop a framework to end the violence of war. Both national and international political systems excluded women's voices. The women delegates argued that the exclusion of women from policy discourse and decisions around war and peace resulted in flawed policy. The delegates adopted a series of resolutions addressing these problems and called for extending the franchise and women's meaningful inclusion in formal international peace processes at war's end.[90][91] Following the conference, secondnameplaceholder and a congressional delegation traveled throughout Europe meeting with leaders, citizen groups, and wounded soldiers from both sides. Her leadership during the conference and her travels to the capitals of the war-torn regions were cited in nominations for the Nobel Peace Prize.[92]secondnameplaceholder was opposed to U.S. interventionism and expansionism and ultimately was against those who sought American dominance abroad.[93] In 1915, she gave a speech at Carnegie Hall and was booed offstage for opposing U.S. intervention into World War I.[94] secondnameplaceholder damned war as a cataclysm that undermined human kindness, solidarity, and civic friendship, and caused families across the world to struggle. In turn, her views were denounced by patriotic groups and newspapers during World War I (1917–18). Oswald Garrison Villard came to her defense when she suggested that armies gave liquor to soldiers just before major ground attacks. "Take the case of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder for one. With what abuse did not the [New York] Times cover her, one of the noblest of our women, because she told the simple truth that the Allied troops were often given liquor or drugs before charging across No Man's Land. Yet when the facts came out at the hands of Sir Philip Gibbs and others not one word of apology was ever forthcoming."[95] Even after the war, the WILPF's program of peace and disarmament was characterized by opponents as radical, Communist-influenced, unpatriotic, and unfeminine. Young veterans in the American Legion, supported by some members of the Daughters of the American Revolution (DAR) and the League of Women Voters, were ill-prepared to confront the older, better-educated, more financially secure and nationally famous women of the WILPF. Nevertheless, the DAR could and did expel secondnameplaceholder from membership in their organization.[96] The Legion's efforts to portray the WILPF members as dangerously naive females resonated with working class audiences, but President Calvin Coolidge and the middle classes supported secondnameplaceholder and her WILPF efforts in the 1920s to prohibit poison gas and outlaw war. After 1920, however, she was widely regarded as the greatest woman of the Progressive Era.[97] In 1931, the award of the Nobel Peace prize earned her near-unanimous acclaim.[98]firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was also a philosopher of peace.[99][100][101] Peace theorists often distinguish between negative and positive peace.[102][103][104][105] Negative peace deals with the absence of violence or war. Positive peace is more complicated. It deals with the kind of society we aspire to, and can take into account concepts like justice, cooperation, the quality of relationships, freedom, order and harmony. firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's philosophy of peace is a type of positive peace. Patricia Shields and Joseph Soeters (2017) have summarized her ideas of peace using the term Peaceweaving.[106] They use weaving as a metaphor because it denotes connection. Fibers come together to form a cloth, which is both flexible and strong. Further, weaving is an activity in which men and women have historically engaged. secondnameplaceholder's peaceweaving is a process which builds "the fabric of peace by emphasizing relationships. Peaceweaving builds these relationships by working on practical problems, engaging people widely with sympathetic understanding while recognizing that progress is measured by the welfare of the vulnerable" [107]While "no record is available of any speech she ever made on behalf of the eighteenth amendment",[108] she nonetheless supported prohibition on the basis that alcohol "was of course a leading lure and a necessary element in houses of prostitution, both from a financial and a social standpoint." She repeated the claim that "professional houses of prostitution could not sustain themselves without the 'vehicle of alcohol.'"[109]
<h2>Legacy</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder is buried at Cedarville Cemetery, Cedarville, Illinois.[110]Hull House and the Peace Movement are widely recognized as the key tangible pillars of secondnameplaceholder's legacy. While her life focused on the development of individuals, her ideas continue to influence social, political and economic reform in the United States, as well as internationally. secondnameplaceholder and Starr's creation of the settlement house, Hull House, impacted the community, immigrant residents, and social work.Willard Motley, a resident artist of Hull House, extracting from secondnameplaceholder' central theory on symbolic interactionism, used the neighborhood and its people to write his 1948 best seller, Knock on Any Door.[111] His novel later became a well known court-room film in 1949. This book and film brought attention to how a resident lived an everyday life inside a settlement house and his relationship with firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder.secondnameplaceholder's role as reformer enabled her to petition the establishment at and alter the social and physical geography of her Chicago neighborhood. Although contemporary academic sociologists defined her engagement as "social work," secondnameplaceholder's efforts differed significantly from activities typically labeled as "social work" during that time period. Before secondnameplaceholder's powerful influence on the profession, social work was largely informed by a "friendly visitor" model in which typically wealthy women of high public stature visited impoverished individuals and, through systematic assessment and intervention, aimed to improve the lives of the poor. secondnameplaceholder rejected the friendly visitor model in favor of a model of social reform/social theory-building, thereby introducing the now-central tenets of social justice and reform to the field of social work.[112]secondnameplaceholder worked with other reform groups toward goals including the first juvenile court law, tenement-house regulation, an eight-hour working day for women, factory inspection, and workers' compensation. She advocated research aimed at determining the causes of poverty and crime, and she supported women's suffrage. She was a strong advocate of justice for immigrants, African Americans, and minority groups by becoming a chartered member of the NAACP. Among the projects that the members of Hull House opened were the Immigrants' Protective League, the Juvenile Protective Association, the first juvenile court in the United States, and a juvenile psychopathic clinic.secondnameplaceholder's influential writings and speeches, on behalf of the formation of the League of Nations and as a peace advocate, influenced the later shape of the United Nations.firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder also sponsored the work of Neva Boyd, who founded the Recreational Training School at Hull House, a one-year educational program in group games, gymnastics, dancing, dramatic arts, play theory, and social problems. At Hull House, Neva Boyd ran movement and recreational groups for children, using games and improvisation to teach language skills, problem-solving, self-confidence and social skills.  During the Great Depression, Boyd worked with the Recreational Project in the Works Progress Administration, (WPA) as The Chicago Training School for Playground Workers, which subsequently became the foundation for the Recreational Therapy and Educational Drama movements in the U.S.  One of her best known disciples, Viola Spolin taught in the Recreational Theater Program at Hull House during the WPA era.  Spolin went on to be a pioneer in the improvisational theater movement in the US and the inventor of Theater Games.The main legacy left by firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder includes her involvement in the creation of the Hull House, impacting communities and the whole social structure, reaching out to colleges and universities in hopes of bettering the educational system, and passing on her knowledge to others through speeches and books. She paved the way for women by publishing several books and co-winning the Nobel Peace Prize in 1931 with Starr.firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was intimately involved with the founding of sociology as a field in the United States.[113][114][115][116]  Hull House enabled secondnameplaceholder to befriend and become a colleague to early members of the Chicago School of Sociology. She actively contributed to the sociology academic literature, publishing five articles in the American Journal of Sociology between 1896 and 1914.[117][118][119][120][121] Her influence, through her work in applied sociology, impacted the thought and direction of the Chicago School of Sociology's members.[114] In 1893, she co-authored the compilation of essays written by Hull House residents and workers titled, Hull-House Maps and Papers. These ideas helped shape and define the interests and methodologies of the Chicago School. She worked with American philosopher George H. Mead and John Dewey[122] on social reform issues, including promoting women's rights, ending child labor, and mediating during the 1910 Garment Workers' Strike. This strike in particular bent thoughts of protests because it dealt with women workers, ethnicity, and working conditions. All of these subjects were key items that secondnameplaceholder wanted to see in society.The University of Chicago Sociology department was established in 1892, three years after Hull House was established (1889). Members of Hull House welcomed the first group of professors, who soon were "intimately involved with Hull House" and assiduously engaged with applied social reform and philanthropy".[123] In 1893, for example, faculty (Vincent, Small and Bennis) worked with firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder and fellow Hull House resident Florence Kelley to pass legislation "banning sweat shops and employment of children" [124] Albion Small, chair of the Chicago Department of Sociology and founder of the American Journal of Sociology, called for a sociology that was active "in the work of perfecting and applying plans and devices for social improvement and amelioration," which took place in the "vast sociological laboratory" that was 19th-century Chicago.[125] Although untenured, women residents of Hull House taught classes in the Chicago Sociology Department. During and after World War I,  the focus of the Chicago Sociology Department shifted away from social activism toward a more positivist orientation. Social activism was also associated with Communism and a "weaker" woman's work orientation. In response to this change, women sociologists in the department "were moved inmasse out of sociology and into social work" in 1920. [126] The contributions of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder and other Hull House residents were buried in history.[127]Mary Jo Deegan, in her 1988 book firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder and the Men of the Chicago School, 1892-1918 was the first person to recover secondnameplaceholder influence on Sociology.[128] Deegan's work has led to recognition of secondnameplaceholder's place in sociology. In a 2001 address, for example, Joe Feagin, then president of the American Sociology Association, identified secondnameplaceholder as a "key founder" and he called for sociology to again claim its activist roots and commitment to social justice.[129]On December 10, 2007, Illinois celebrated the first annual firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Day.[130][131] firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Day was initiated by a dedicated school teacher from Dongola, Illinois, assisted by the Illinois Division of the American Association of University Women (AAUW).[132] Chicago activist Jan Lisa Huttner traveled throughout Illinois as Director of International Relations for AAUW-Illinois to help publicize the date, and later gave annual presentations about firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Day in costume as firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder. In 2010, Huttner appeared as firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder at a 150th Birthday Party sponsored by Rockford University (firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder' alma mater), and in 2011, she appeared as firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder at an event sponsored by the Chicago Park District.[133]There is a firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Memorial Park located near Navy Pier in Chicago. A six-piece sculptural grouping honoring secondnameplaceholder by Louise Bourgeois called "Helping Hands” was originally installed in 1993 at secondnameplaceholder Memorial Park. However, they were "relocated to Chicago Women’s Park and Gardens” in 2011 after being vandalized.[134] The firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder memorial sculpture was Chicago’s first major artwork to honor an important woman.[135] In 2007, the state of Illinois renamed the Northwest Tollway as the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Memorial Tollway.[136]  Hull House buildings were demolished for the establishment of the campus of the University of Illinois at Chicago in 1963, and relocated. The Hull residence itself was preserved as a museum and monument to firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder.[137]The firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder College of Social Work is a professional school at the University of Illinois at Chicago.[138] firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Business Careers Center is a high school in Cleveland, Ohio.[139] firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder High School For Academic Careers is a high school in The Bronx, NY.[140] firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder House is a residence hall built in 1936 at Connecticut College.In 1973, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was inducted into the National Women's Hall of Fame.[141] In 2008 firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was inducted into the Chicago Gay and Lesbian Hall of Fame.[142] secondnameplaceholder was inducted into the Chicago Literary Hall of Fame in 2012.[143] Also, in 2012 she was inducted into the Legacy Walk, an outdoor public display which celebrates LGBT history and people.[144] In 2014, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was one of the first 20 honorees awarded a 3-foot x 3-foot bronze plaque on San Francisco's Rainbow Honor Walk (www.rainbowhonorwalk.org) paying tribute to LGBT heroes and heroines. In 2015, secondnameplaceholder was named by Equality Forum as one of their 31 Icons of the 2015 LGBT History Month.[145]firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was possibly the inspiration of the character of Edith Keeler (played by Joan Collins) in the Hugo Award winning 1967 Star Trek episode The City on the Edge of Forever, which is widely considered to be one of the best episodes in the Star Trek series. Like secondnameplaceholder, Keeler was a visionary social reformer, based in a large city, who was active in the world peace movement.In 2014 secondnameplaceholder was one of the inaugural honorees in the Rainbow Honor Walk, a walk of fame in San Francisco's Castro neighborhood noting LGBTQ people who have "made significant contributions in their fields."[146][147][148]
<h2>Early life and education</h2>
Butler, great-grandson of Morgan John Rhys,[2] was born in Elizabeth, New Jersey to Mary Butler and manufacturing worker Henry Butler.  He enrolled in Columbia College (later Columbia University) and joined the Peithologian Society. He earned his bachelor of arts degree in 1882, his master's degree in 1883 and his doctorate in 1884.  Butler's academic and other achievements led  Theodore Roosevelt to call him "firstnameplaceholder Miraculous." In 1885, Butler studied in Paris and Berlin and became a lifelong friend of future Secretary of State Elihu Root.  Through Root he also met Roosevelt and William Howard Taft.  In the fall of 1885, Butler joined the staff of Columbia's philosophy department.In 1887, he co-founded with Grace Hoadley Dodge,[3] and became president of, the New York School for the Training of Teachers, which later affiliated with Columbia University and was renamed Teachers College, Columbia University, and from which a co-educational experimental and developmental unit became Horace Mann School.[4]  From 1890 to 1891, Butler was a lecturer at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore. Throughout the 1890s Butler served on the New Jersey Board of Education and helped form the College Entrance Examination Board.
<h2>Presidency of Columbia University</h2>
In 1901, Butler became acting president of Columbia University, and in 1902 formally became president. Among the many dignitaries in attendance at his investiture was President Roosevelt. Butler was president of Columbia for 43 years, the longest tenure in the university's history, retiring in 1945. As president, Butler carried out a major expansion of the campus, adding many new buildings, schools, and departments. These additions included Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, the first academic medical center in the world.In 1919, Butler amended the admissions process to Columbia in order to limit the number of Jewish and Episcopal students. Butler's policy was successful[dubious  – discuss] and the number of students hailing from New York City dropped from 54% to 23% stemming what one administrator[who?] called "the invasion of the Jewish student."[5] This is one of the reasons why Butler has been called an Anti-Semite.In 1937 he was admitted as an honorary member of the New York Society of the Cincinnati.[6]In 1941, the Pulitzer Prize fiction jury selected Ernest Hemingway's For Whom the Bell Tolls. The Pulitzer Board initially agreed with that judgment, but Butler, ex officio head of the Pulitzer board, found the novel offensive and persuaded the board to reverse its determination, so that no novel received the prize that year.[7]During his lifetime, Columbia named its philosophy library for him; after he died, its main academic library, previously known as South Hall, was rechristened Butler Library. A faculty apartment building on 119th Street and Morningside Drive was also renamed in Butler's honour, as was a major prize in philosophy.An in-depth look at Butler's time at Columbia University also can be found in The Goose-Step: A Study of American Education, by Upton Sinclair.
<h2>Political activity</h2>
Butler was a delegate to each Republican National Convention from 1888 to 1936; in 1912, after Vice President James S. Sherman died eight days before the presidential election, Butler was designated to receive the electoral votes that Sherman would have received: the Republican ticket won only 8 electoral votes from Utah and Vermont, finishing third behind the Democrats and the Progressives.In 1916, Butler tried to secure the Republican presidential nomination for Elihu Root. Butler also sought the nomination for himself in 1920, without success.[8]Butler believed that Prohibition was a mistake, with negative effects on the country. He became active in the successful effort for Repeal in 1933.He credited John W. Burgess along with Alexander Hamilton for providing the philosophical basis of his Republican principles.[9]In June 1936 Butler traveled to the Carnegie Endowment Peace Conference in London where, at the meeting, the question of gold being used internationally was considered.
<h2>Internationalist</h2>
Butler was the chair of the Lake Mohonk Conference on International Arbitration that met periodically from 1907 to 1912.  In this time he was appointed president of the American branch of International Conciliation. Butler was also instrumental in persuading Andrew Carnegie to provide the initial $10 million funding for the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.  Butler became head of international education and communication, founded the European branch of the Endowment headquartered in Paris, and was President of the Endowment from 1925 to 1945. For his work in this field, he received the Nobel Peace Prize for 1931 (shared with Jane Addams) "[For his promotion] of the Briand-Kellogg pact" and for his work as the "leader of the more establishment-oriented part of the American peace movement".In December 1916 Butler, Roosevelt and other philanthropists including Scottish-born industrialist John C. Moffat, William Astor Chanler, Joseph Choate, Clarence Mackay, George von Lengerke Meyer, and John Grier Hibben purchased the Château de Chavaniac, birthplace of the Marquis de Lafayette in Auvergne, to serve as a headquarters for the French Heroes Lafayette Memorial Fund,[10] which was managed by Chanler's ex-wife Beatrice Ashley Chanler.[11][12]Butler was President of the Pilgrims Society, which promotes Anglo-American friendship.[13] He served as President of the Pilgrims from 1928 to 1946. Butler was president of The American Academy of Arts and Letters from 1928 to 1941.
<h2>Personal life</h2>
Butler married Susanna Edwards Schuyler (1863–1903) in 1887 and had one daughter from that marriage. Susanna was the daughter of Jacob Rutsen Schuyler (1816–1887) and Susannah Haigh Edwards (born 1830). His wife died in 1903 and he married again in 1907 to Kate La Montagne, granddaughter of New York property developer Thomas E. Davis.[14]  In 1940, Butler completed his autobiography with the publication of the second volume of Across the Busy Years.[15] When Butler became almost blind in 1945 at the age of eighty-three, he resigned from the posts he held and died two years later. Butler is buried at Cedar Lawn Cemetery, in Paterson, New Jersey.Despite Butler's accomplishments[clarification needed], many people regarded him as arrogant.  He autocratically dismissed faculty members  who displeased him, such as the great classical scholar Harry Thurston Peck, and others who dared to question his dismissals, such as the civil rights pioneer Joel Elias Spingarn.  He had little respect for Columbia's fine arts faculty, and stripped them of academic affairs voting rights in 1903, accelerating his deteriorating relationship with music professor Edward MacDowell; he went so far as to accuse MacDowell of unprofessional conduct and sloppy teaching, prompting MacDowell's abrupt resignation from Columbia in February 1904. In 1939, a former student of Butler's, Rolfe Humphries, published in the pages of Poetry an effort titled "Draft Ode for a Phi Beta Kappa Occasion" that followed a classical format of unrhymed blank verse in iambic pentameter with one classical reference per line. The first letters of each line of the resulting acrostic spelled out the message: "firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder is a horses [sic] ass." Upon discovering the "hidden" message, the irate editors ran a formal apology.[16] Randolph Silliman Bourne lampooned him as "Alexander Macintosh Butcher" in "One of our Conquerers", a 1915 essay he published in The New Republic.Butler wrote and spoke voluminously on all manner of subjects ranging from education to world peace. Although marked by erudition and great learning, his work tended toward the portentous and overblown. In The American Mercury, the critic Dorothy Dunbar Bromley referred to Butler's pronouncements as "those interminable miasmas of guff."[17]
(!!)Article(!/!)
Sir Ralph firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (26 December 1872 – 7 October 1967) was an English Nobel Peace Prize winner. He was a lecturer, journalist, author and Member of Parliament[1] for the Labour Party.secondnameplaceholder was one of the principal founders of the Union of Democratic Control. He served on the Council of the Royal Institute of International Affairs, was an executive for the World Committee against War and Fascism, a member of the executive committee of the League of Nations Union, and the president of the Abyssinia Association. He was made a Knight Bachelor in 1931 and awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1933.[2][3]
<h2>Biography</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was one of six children, born to Thomas secondnameplaceholder Lane and Mary (née Brittain) Lane in Holbeach, Lincolnshire, England.[3] He was born Ralph firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Lane, but later adopted secondnameplaceholder as his sole surname.[4] He attended several schools in England, the Lycée Alexandre Ribot at Saint-Omer in France,[3] and the University of Geneva, while editing an English-language newspaper published in Geneva.[3]In Geneva, secondnameplaceholder felt that Europe was "hopelessly entangled in insoluble problems". Then, still only 17, he emigrated to the West Coast of the United States,[3] where he for several years worked as a vine planter, an irrigation-ditch digger, a cowboy, a California homesteader (after filing for American citizenship), a mail-carrier, a prospector,[5] and then, closer to his natural skills, as a reporter for the St. Louis Globe-Democrat and later the San Francisco Chronicle.[3]Due to family matters he returned to England briefly in 1898, then moved to Paris to work as a sub-editor on the English-language Daily Messenger,[5] and then as a staff contributor to the newspaper Éclair. He also through this period acted as French correspondent for some American newspapers, to which he sent dispatches on the progress of the Dreyfus case.[3] During 1905–12, he became the Paris editor for the Daily Mail.He returned to England and, in 1914, he was one of the founders of the Union of Democratic Control. He joined the Labour Party in 1920 and was parliamentary candidate for Rushcliffe in  the general election of 1922 and for Rossendale in 1923. He was MP for Bradford North from 1929 to 1931; after the formation of the National Government, he announced his decision not to seek re-election on 24 September 1931.[6] In 1931 he was knighted for his public and political services, and in 1933 he was presented with the Nobel Peace Prize.[3] He stood unsuccessfully for the London University seat in 1935.From the mid-1930s, secondnameplaceholder actively campaigned for collective international opposition to the aggressive policies of Germany, Italy, and Japan. He went to the United States in 1940 to lecture in favour of American support for Britain in World War II, and remained there until after the publication of his autobiography in 1951. He later returned to Britain and died at the age of 94 in Croydon, Surrey.[5]He married  Beatrice Cuvellier but they separated and he lived his last 55 years alone. He purchased Northey Island, Essex, which is attached to the mainland only at low tide, and lived in the sole dwelling on the island.His Nobel Peace Prize medal and accompanying scroll are held by the Imperial War Museum.[7]
<h2>The Great Illusion</h2>
secondnameplaceholder is most widely remembered for his 1909 pamphlet, Europe's Optical Illusion, which was published the following year (and many years thereafter) as the book, The Great Illusion. (The anti-war film La Grande Illusion took its title from his pamphlet.) The thesis of the book was that the integration of the economies of European countries had grown to such a degree that war between them would be entirely futile, making militarism obsolete. This quotation from the "Synopsis" to the popular 1913 edition summarizes his basic argument.
<h2>The Money Game</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was also the designer of The Money Game, a visual method of teaching schoolchildren the fundamentals of finance and banking. First published in 1928 by J. M. Dent & Sons, The Money Game, How to Play It: A New Instrument of Economic Education was both a book and a game. The bulk of the book was an essay on money and a discussion of economic theory, it also contained a summary of the game's story and an explanation of the rules.[9]
<h2>Influence</h2>
secondnameplaceholder's book The Press And The Organisation of Society is cited as a source in F. R. Leavis' pamphlet Mass Civilisation and Minority Culture (1930).[10] Vera Brittain quoted secondnameplaceholder's statement on "the moral obligation to be intelligent" several times in her work.[11]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (13 September 1863 – 20 October 1935) was a British iron moulder and Labour politician. He was the first Labour cabinet minister, won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1934 and, uniquely, served three separate terms as Leader of the Labour Party in three different decades. He was popular among his colleagues, who called him "Uncle firstnameplaceholder" in acknowledgement of his integrity, his devotion to the cause and his imperturbability. He was a transitional figure whose policies were, at first, close to those of the Liberal Party. The trades unions rejected his emphasis on arbitration and conciliation, and thwarted his goal of unifying the Labour Party and the trade unions.
<h2>Early life</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was born at 10 Paterson Street, Anderston, Glasgow, Scotland, in 1863, the son of Agnes, a domestic servant, and David secondnameplaceholder, a textile worker who died when firstnameplaceholder was ten years old. After his father's death, the secondnameplaceholders moved to Newcastle upon Tyne in the North-East of England, where Agnes later married Robert Heath.[1]secondnameplaceholder worked at Robert Stephenson and Sons' General Foundry Works from the age of twelve. After finishing his apprenticeship there aged seventeen, he moved to Southampton for a year and then returned to work as an iron moulder (a type of foundryman) in Newcastle upon Tyne.secondnameplaceholder became a Methodist in 1879 (having previously been a Congregationalist) and became a Local Preacher. After he lost his job in 1884, he concentrated on preaching.
<h2>Union leader</h2>
In 1892, secondnameplaceholder entered the complex world of trade union politics when he was elected as a paid organiser for the Friendly Society of Iron Founders. He also became a representative on the North East Conciliation Board. secondnameplaceholder believed that strikes caused more harm than they were worth and tried to avoid them whenever he could. For this reason, he opposed the formation of the General Federation of Trade Unions, as he was convinced that it would lead to more strikes.
<h2>The Labour Party</h2>
In 1900 secondnameplaceholder was one of the 129 trade union and socialist delegates who passed Keir Hardie's motion to create the Labour Representation Committee (LRC). In 1903, secondnameplaceholder was elected Treasurer of the LRC and was also elected as Member of Parliament (MP) for Barnard Castle at a by-election. From 1903 to 1904, secondnameplaceholder also served as mayor of Darlington, County Durham.[2]In 1906, the LRC changed its name to the Labour Party and won 29 seats at the general election. In 1908, when Hardie resigned as Leader of the Labour Party, secondnameplaceholder was elected to replace him. He remained Leader until his own resignation two years later, in 1910.
<h2>Cabinet Minister</h2>
In 1914 the First World War broke out and Ramsay MacDonald resigned from the Leadership of the Labour Party in protest. secondnameplaceholder was elected to replace him.  The two became enemies.[3]In 1915, following Prime Minister H. H. Asquith's decision to create a coalition government, secondnameplaceholder became the first member of the Labour Party to become a member of the Cabinet, as President of the Board of Education.In 1916, David Lloyd George forced Asquith to resign and replaced him as Prime Minister. secondnameplaceholder became a member of the small War Cabinet with the post of Minister without Portfolio on 9 December 1916. The other Labour representatives who joined secondnameplaceholder in Lloyd George's coalition government were John Hodge, who became Minister of Labour, and George Barnes, who became Minister of Pensions. secondnameplaceholder resigned on 11 August 1917 after his proposal for an international conference on the war was rejected by the rest of the Cabinet.[4][5]secondnameplaceholder turned his attention to building a strong constituency-based support network for the Labour Party. Previously, it had little national organisation, based largely on branches of unions and socialist societies. Working with Ramsay MacDonald and Sidney Webb, secondnameplaceholder in 1918 established a national network of constituency organisations. They operated separately from trade unions and the National Executive Committee and were open to everyone sympathetic to the party's policies. Secondly, secondnameplaceholder secured the adoption of a comprehensive statement of party policies, as drafted by Sidney Webb. Entitled "Labour and the New Social Order," it remained the basic Labour platform until 1950. It proclaimed a socialist party whose principles included a guaranteed minimum standard of living for everyone, nationalisation of industry, and heavy taxation of large incomes and of wealth.[6]
<h2>The "Coupon Election" and the 1920s</h2>
secondnameplaceholder lost his seat in the "Coupon Election" of 14 December 1918, which had been announced within twenty-four hours of the end of hostilities and which resulted in a landslide victory for a coalition formed by Lloyd George.[7] secondnameplaceholder returned to Parliament in 1919 after winning a by-election in Widnes. He then became Labour's Chief Whip.Vladimir Lenin held secondnameplaceholder in very low regard. In a letter to the Soviet Commissar for Foreign Affairs, Georgy Chicherin, written on 10 February 1922 and referring to the Genoa Conference, Lenin wrote: "secondnameplaceholder is as stupid as Kerensky, and for this reason he is helping us."[8]secondnameplaceholder lost his seat again, at the general election of 1922. He returned to Parliament via another by-election, this time representing Newcastle East, but again, he was unseated at the general election of 1923. He returned to Parliament just two months later after winning another by-election in Burnley.In 1924, secondnameplaceholder was appointed as Home Secretary in the first-ever Labour government, led by MacDonald. This government was defeated later the same year and lost the general election that followed.Having been re-elected in 1924, secondnameplaceholder refused to challenge MacDonald for the party leadership. Worried about factionalism in the Labour Party, he published a pamphlet, Labour and the Nation, in which he attempted to clarify the party's goals.
<h2>Foreign Secretary</h2>
In 1929, Labour formed another minority government and MacDonald appointed secondnameplaceholder as Foreign Secretary, a position secondnameplaceholder used to try to reduce the tensions that had been building up in Europe since the end of the First World War. Diplomatic relations were re-established with the USSR and secondnameplaceholder guaranteed Britain's full support to the League of Nations.[9]
<h2>The MacDonald "betrayal"</h2>
The Great Depression plunged the government into a terminal crisis. The Cabinet agreed that it was essential to maintain the Gold Standard and that the Budget needed to be balanced, but were divided over reducing unemployment benefits by 10%. At first, secondnameplaceholder gave strong support to Prime Minister MacDonald throughout the financial and political crisis of August. The financial crisis across Europe was worsening and Britain's gold reserves were at high risk. New York banks provided an emergency loan; but additional money was needed and to get it, the budget had to be balanced. MacDonald and Chancellor of the Exchequer Philip Snowden proposed cuts in unemployment benefits. secondnameplaceholder rejected that solution and became the leader of nearly half the Cabinet. The Labour Cabinet decided to resign. The King implored MacDonald to remain and form an all-party National government that would make the budget cuts. MacDonald agreed on 24 August 1931 and formed an emergency National Government, with members from all parties. The new cabinet had four Labourites (now called "National Labour Party") who stood with Macdonald, plus four Conservatives and two Liberals.   Labour unions were strongly opposed and the Labour Party officially repudiated the new National government. It expelled MacDonald and his supporters from the party. secondnameplaceholder cast the only vote against the expulsions. Against his inclinations, secondnameplaceholder accepted the leadership of the main Labour Party and led it into the general election on 27 October against the cross-party National coalition.  It was a disastrous result for Labour, which was reduced to a small minority of 52.  MacDonald won the largest landslide in British electoral history.  Yet again secondnameplaceholder lost his seat, at Burnley.  The following year, he relinquished the party leadership.[10]
<h2>Later career</h2>
secondnameplaceholder returned to Parliament after winning a by-election at Clay Cross, achieving the unique feat of being elected a total of five times at by-elections in constituencies where he had not previously been the MP. He holds the record for the greatest number of comebacks from losing a previous seat.secondnameplaceholder spent the rest of his life trying to halt the gathering storm of war. He worked with the World League of Peace and chaired the Geneva Disarmament Conference, and in 1934 he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. (On 3 April 2013 his Nobel medal was stolen from the official residence of the Lord Mayor of Newcastle.)[11]secondnameplaceholder died in 1935, aged 72. All three of secondnameplaceholder's sons saw military service during the Great War, the eldest, David, being killed in action in 1916 whilst serving as a Captain with the Middlesex Regiment (Duke of Cambridge's Own). His surviving sons also became Labour politicians: second son William was granted the title of Baron secondnameplaceholder in 1945, while his third son, firstnameplaceholder, was created Baron Rowley in 1966.The Labour History Archive and Study Centre at the People's History Museum in Manchester holds the papers of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder in their collection, spanning from 1915 to 1935.[12]
<h2>Early life</h2>
Ossietzky was born in Hamburg, the son of firstnameplaceholder Ignatius secondnameplaceholder (1848–1891), a Protestant from Upper Silesia; and Rosalie (née Pratzka), a devout Catholic who wanted her son to enter Holy Orders and become a priest or monk. His father worked as a stenographer in the office of a lawyer and of Senator Max Predöhl, but died when Ossietzky was two years old. Ossietzky was baptized as a Roman Catholic in Hamburg on 10 November 1889 and confirmed in the Lutheran Hauptkirche St Michaelis on 23 March 1904.[2]The von in Ossietzky's name, which would generally suggest noble ancestry, is of unknown origin. Ossietzky himself explained, perhaps half in jest, that it derived from an ancestor's service in a Polish lancer cavalry regiment as the Elector of Brandenburg was unable to pay his two regiments of lancers at one point due to an empty war chest, so he instead conferred nobility upon the entirety of the two regiments.[3]Despite his failure to finish Realschule (a form of German secondary school), Ossietzky succeeded in embarking on a career in journalism, with the topics of his articles ranging from theatre criticism to feminism and the problems of early motorization. He later said that his opposition to German militarism during the final years of the German Empire under Wilhelm II led him as early as 1913 to become a pacifist.[citation needed]That year, he married Maud Lichfield-Woods, a Mancunian suffragette, born to British colonial officer and the great-granddaughter of an Indian princess in Hyderabad. They had one daughter, Rosalinde. During World War I, Ossietzky was drafted much against his will into the Army and his experiences during the war where he was appalled by the carnage of the war confirmed him in his pacifism. During the Weimar Republic (1919–1933), his political commentaries gained him a reputation as a fervent supporter of democracy and a pluralistic society.[4]
<h2>Discovery of illegal German rearmament</h2>
In 1921, the German government founded the Arbeits-Kommandos (work squads) led by Major Bruno Ernst Buchrucker. Officially a labour group intended to assist with civilian projects, in reality, they were used by Germany to exceed the limits on troop strength set by the Treaty of Versailles.[4]Buchrucker's Black Reichswehr took its orders from a secret group in the German Army known as Sondergruppe R comprising Kurt von Schleicher, Eugen Ott, Fedor von Bock and Kurt von Hammerstein-Equord. The Black Reichswehr became infamous for its practice of murdering Germans suspected of working as informers for the Allied Control Commission.[4]The killings perpetrated by the Black Reichswehr were justified under the so-called Femegerichte (secret court) system under which secret "trials" were conducted that the victims were unaware of and after finding the accused guilty they would send out a man to execute the "court's" sentence of death. The killings were ordered by the officers from Sondergruppe R.[4] Regarding the Femegerichte murders, Ossietzky wrote:Reflecting his pacifism, Ossietzky became secretary of the German Peace Society (Deutsche Friedensgesellschaft).[citation needed]
<h2>"Homeless left"</h2>
In the 1920s, Ossietzky became one of the leaders of the "homeless left", centered on the newspaper Die Weltbühne which rejected Communism, but found the Social Democrats too inclined to compromise with the old order.[5]Ossietzky often complained that the men who staffed the bureaucracy, the judiciary and the military under the Kaiser (German Emperor Wilhelm II) were the same men serving the Weimar Republic, something that was a major concern for him as he frequently warned that these men had no commitment to democracy, and would turn on the republic at the first chance.[5]In this regard, Ossietzky at Die Weltbühne helped to publish a statistical study in 1923, showing that German judges were inclined to impose extremely harsh sentences on those who broke laws in the name of the left while imposing very lenient sentences on those who committed much violence in the name of the right. He often drew a contrast between the fate of Social Democrat Felix Fechenbach who was imprisoned after a questionable trial for publishing secret documents showing that the German Empire was responsible for World War I and that of the Navy captain Hermann Ehrhardt of the Freikorps whose men occupied Berlin during the Kapp Putsch, killed several hundred civilians and was never tried for his actions. At the same time, Ossietzky was often critical of those republicans who claimed to believe in democracy without actually knowing what democracy meant.[6]Ossietzky was especially critical of the Reichsbanner Schwarz-Rot-Gold (Reich Banner Black-Red-Gold), the paramilitary group set up by the Social Democrats to defend democracy. Ossietzky wrote in 1924:In 1927, Ossietzky succeeded Kurt Tucholsky as editor-in-chief of the periodical Die Weltbühne.[7] In 1932, he supported Ernst Thälmann's candidacy for the German presidency, though still a critic of the actual policy of the German Communist Party and the Soviet Union.[citation needed]
<h2>Abteilung M affair</h2>
In 1929, Walter Kreiser, one of the writers for Die Weltbühne, published an exposé of the training of a special air unit of the Reichswehr, referred to as Abteilung M (M Section), which was secretly training in Germany and in Soviet Russia, in violation of Germany's agreements under the Treaty of Versailles. Kreiser and Ossietzky, the paper's editor, were questioned by a magistrate of the Supreme Court about the article later that year and were finally indicted in early 1931 for "treason and espionage", the assertion being that they had drawn international attention to state affairs which the state had purposefully attempted to keep secret. The arrests were widely seen at the time as an effort to silence Die Weltbühne, which had been a vocal critic of the Reichswehr's policies and secret expansion.[8]Counsel for the defendants pointed out that the information they had published was true and more to the point that the budgeting for Abteilung M had actually been cited in reports by the Reichstag's budgeting commission. The prosecution successfully countered that Kreiser and Ossietzky as his editor should have known that the reorganization was a state secret when he questioned the Ministry of Defense on the subject of Abteilung M and the ministry refused to comment on it. Kreiser and Ossietzky were convicted and sentenced to eighteen months in prison.[9] Kreiser fled Germany, but Ossietzky remained and was imprisoned, being released at the end of 1932 for the Christmas amnesty.[10]
<h2>Arrest by the Nazis</h2>
Ossietzky continued to be a constant warning voice against militarism and Nazism. In 1932, he published an article in which he stated:[11]In the same essay, Ossietzky wrote:Finally, Ossietzky warned: "Today there is a strong smell of blood in the air. Literary anti-Semitism forges the moral weapon for murder. Sturdy and honest lads will take care of the rest".[12]When Adolf Hitler was appointed Chancellor in January 1933, the Nazi dictatorship began, but even then Ossietzky was one of a very small group of public figures who continued to speak out against the Nazi Party. On 28 February 1933, after the Reichstag fire, he was arrested and held in so-called protective custody in Spandau prison. Wilhelm von Sternburg, one of Ossietzky's biographers, surmises that if Ossietzky had had a few more days, he would surely have joined the vast majority of writers who fled the country. In short, Ossietzky underestimated the speed with which the Nazis would go about ridding the country of unwanted political opponents. He was detained afterwards at the Esterwegen concentration camp near Oldenburg, among other camps. Throughout his time in the concentration camps, Ossietzky was mercilessly mistreated by the guards while being deprived of food. In November 1935, when a representative of the International Red Cross visited Ossietzky, he reported that he saw "a trembling, deadly pale something, a creature that appeared to be without feeling, one eye swollen, teeth knocked out, dragging a broken, badly healed leg . . . a human being who had reached the uttermost limits of what could be borne".[13]
<h2>1935 Nobel Peace Prize</h2>
Ossietzky's international rise to fame began in 1936 when already suffering from serious tuberculosis he was awarded the 1935 Nobel Peace Prize. The government had been unable to prevent this but refused to release him to travel to Oslo to receive the prize. In an act of civil disobedience, after Hermann Göring prompted him to decline the prize, Ossietzky issued a note from the hospital saying that he disagreed with the authorities who had stated that by accepting the prize he would cast himself outside the deutsche Volksgemeinschaft (community of German people):The award was extremely controversial, prompting two members of the prize committee to resign because they held or had held positions in the Norwegian government.[14] King Haakon VII of Norway, who had been present at other award ceremonies, stayed away from the ceremony.[15]The award divided public opinion and was generally condemned by conservative forces. The leading conservative Norwegian newspaper Aftenposten argued in an editorial that Ossietzky was a criminal who had attacked his country "with the use of methods that violated the law long before Hitler came into power" and that "lasting peace between peoples and nations can only be achieved by respecting the existing laws".[citation needed]Ossietzky's Nobel Prize was not allowed to be mentioned in the German press and a government decree forbade German citizens from accepting future Nobel Prizes.[7][16]
<h2>Death</h2>
In May 1936, Ossietzky was sent to the Westend hospital in Berlin-Charlottenburg because of his tuberculosis, but under Gestapo surveillance. On 4 May 1938, he died in the Nordend hospital in Berlin-Pankow, still in police custody,[2] of tuberculosis and from the after-effects of the abuse he suffered in the concentration camps.
<h2>Legacy</h2>
Supporters of convicted Nobel Prize-winning Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo compared him to Ossietzky, both being prevented by the authorities from accepting their awards and both having died while in custody.[17][18] The International League for Human Rights awards an annual firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Medal "to honor citizens or initiatives that promote basic human rights".[19]In 1963, East German television produced the film firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder about Ossietzky's life, starring Hans-Peter Minetti in the title role.[20] Ossietzky is portrayed as a secondary character in the graphic novel series Berlin by Jason Lutes (3 volumes, 1996–2018).In 1991, the University of Oldenburg was renamed firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder University of Oldenburg in his honor. Ossietzky's daughter Rosalinde secondnameplaceholder-Palm took part in the formal ceremony, accompanied by then Prime Minister of Lower Saxony Gerhard Schröder.[21]In 1992, Ossietzky's 1931 conviction was upheld by Germany's Bundesgerichtshof (Federal Court of Justice), applying the law as it stood in 1931.
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (November 1, 1878–May 5, 1959) was an Argentine academic and politician, and in 1936, the first Argentine Nobel Peace Prize recipient.[1]
<h2>Biography</h2>
Born in Buenos Aires, secondnameplaceholder was a descendant of an early Argentine patriot. He married the daughter of president Roque Sáenz Peña. secondnameplaceholder achieved renown not only as foreign minister of Argentina for his practical work in drafting international agreements and in conducting international mediation, but also as a professor for his scholarship in the fields of labor legislation and international law.secondnameplaceholder was a distinguished student at Lacordaire College and at the [University of Buenos Aires] where he received the Doctor of Laws degree in 1903, summa cum laude. After study in Paris and travel abroad, he accepted a professorship in law and constitutional history at the University of La Plata, where he began the teaching career that was to span more than forty years. Later, he inaugurated a course in sociology at the University of Buenos Aires, taught political economy and constitutional law in the Law School of the university, and eventually served as the president of the university.secondnameplaceholder was a leading Argentine academician in two areas. A pioneer in the field of labor legislation, he edited several treatises on labor legislation in Argentina and on the need for a universally recognized doctrine on the treatment of labor - among them, Centro de legislacíon social y del trabajo (1927) [Center of Social and Labor Legislation], Traités internationaux de type social (1924), Código nacional del trabajo (three volumes, 1933) [National Code of Labor Law]. In the arena of practical affairs, secondnameplaceholder drafted legislation affecting labor in Argentina, supported the founding of the International Labor Organization in 1919, and presided over the ILO Conference of 1928 in Geneva while serving simultaneously as leader of the Argentine delegation.In international law, his other field of major scholarly interest, he published "La Crise de la codification et de la doctrine Argentine de droit international" (1931); and he spoke, wrote, or drafted legislation on many subjects with international ramifications - among them, asylum, colonization, immigration, arbitration, and international peace. His brief Vida internacional, which he wrote at the age of seventy, is an urbane by-product of all this study and experience.secondnameplaceholder began his political career in 1906 as director of Public Credit and then became the secretary-general for the municipality of Buenos Aires in 1907. In 1908 he was elected to the first of two successive terms in Parliament. There he initiated legislation regarding coastal water rights, irrigation, sugar production, government finances, colonization, and immigration. His main interest, however, lay in foreign affairs. He provided leadership in saving Argentina's arbitration treaty with Italy, which almost foundered in 1907–1908, and eventually became the unofficial adviser to both the legislature and the foreign office on the analysis and implications of proposed foreign treaties. secondnameplaceholder though was also a controversial public figure as he was seen by the masses as an elitist patrician who was too conservative and favored British intervention, especially in railroad construction.[2][3]Appointed minister of Justice and Education in 1915, he instituted educational reforms by integrating the different divisions of public education and by developing a curriculum at the intermediate level for the vocational and technical training of manpower needed in a developing industrial country.When General Agustín P. Justo became president of Argentina in 1932, he appointed secondnameplaceholder as foreign minister. In this post for six years, secondnameplaceholder brought international prestige to Argentina. He played an important role in every South American diplomatic issue of the middle thirties, induced Argentina to rejoin the League of Nations after an absence of thirteen years, and represented Argentina at virtually every international meeting of consequence during this period.His work in ending the Chaco War between Paraguay and Bolivia (1932–1935) had not only local significance but generalized international importance as well. When he took over the foreign office, he immediately engaged in a series of moves to lay the diplomatic groundwork for a negotiated settlement of this dispute. In 1932 he initiated at Washington the Declaration of August 3 which put the American states on record as refusing to recognize any territorial change in the hemisphere brought about by force. Next, he drew up a Treaty of Nonaggression and Conciliation which was signed by six South American countries in October, 1933, and by all of the American countries at the Seventh Pan-American Conference at Montevideo two months later. In 1935 he organized mediation by six neutral American nations which resulted in the cessation of hostilities between Paraguay and Bolivia. Meanwhile, in 1934, secondnameplaceholder presented the South American Antiwar Pact to the League of Nations where it was well received and signed by eleven countries. Acclaimed for all of these efforts, he was elected president of the Assembly of the League of Nations in 1936.After his retirement from the foreign ministry in 1938, secondnameplaceholder returned to academic life, became president of the University of Buenos Aires for two years (1941–1943), and rounded out his career as a professor for an additional three years (1943–1946).secondnameplaceholder was known as a strict disciplinarian in his office, a logician at the conference table, a charming host in his home or his art gallery, and a man of sartorial elegance who wore, it is said, the highest collars in Buenos Aires. In addition to the Nobel Peace Prize, he was awarded the Grand Cross of the Legion of Honor of France and analogous honors from ten other countries.He died in 1959 at the age of eighty from the effects of a brain hemorrhage.In March 2014 his solid gold Nobel medal was put up for auction after being found in a South American pawn shop.[4]In August 2014 a project for rebuying his Nobel medal by the Argentine Nation was presented at the Argentine congress.[5] His auctioned medal was later won and is now owned by a private Asian collector.[6][7]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (October 2, 1871 – July 23, 1955) was an American politician from Tennessee and the longest-serving U.S. Secretary of State, holding the position for 11 years (1933–1944) in the administration of President Franklin Delano Roosevelt during most of World War II.  Before that appointment he represented Tennessee for two years in the United States Senate and twenty-two years in the House of Representatives.secondnameplaceholder received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1945 for his role in establishing the United Nations, and was referred to by President Roosevelt as the "Father of the United Nations".[1]
<h2>Early life and education</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was born in a log cabin in Olympus, Tennessee, which is now part of Pickett County, Tennessee, but was then part of Overton County.[citation needed] He was the third of the five sons of William Paschal secondnameplaceholder (1840–1923) and Mary Elizabeth secondnameplaceholder (née Riley) (1841–1903). His brothers were named Orestes (1868), Sanadius (1870), Wyoming (1875), and Roy (1881).secondnameplaceholder's father reportedly tracked down and killed a man because of a blood feud.[2] His mother was a descendant of Isaac Riley who was granted 200 acres (0.81 km2) in Pickett County near Byrdstown for Revolutionary War service (this land is still in the family),[citation needed] as well as Samuel Wood who emigrated from Leicestershire, England on the ship Hopewell and fought in the Virginia Militia. secondnameplaceholder's mother's family (Riley-Wood) holds the DAR distinction of the most documented ancestors to have fought in the Revolutionary War.[citation needed] secondnameplaceholder devoted a section in his memoirs "Cabin on the Hill" to dispelling an old rumor that his mother was part Cherokee Indian, and subsequent documented family history has confirmed his ancestry.secondnameplaceholder attended college from 1889 until 1890. He gave his first speech at the age of 16. At the age of 19, secondnameplaceholder became the elected chairman of the Clay County Democratic Party. secondnameplaceholder studied at National Normal University (later merged with Wilmington College, Ohio) from 1889 until 1890.  In 1891, he graduated from Cumberland School of Law at Cumberland University and was admitted to the bar.
<h2>Early career</h2>
secondnameplaceholder served in the Tennessee House of Representatives from 1893 until 1897. During the Spanish–American War, he served in Cuba as a captain in the Fourth Regiment of the Tennessee Volunteer Infantry.From 1903 to 1907, secondnameplaceholder served as a local judge; later he was elected to the United States House of Representatives where he served 11 terms (1907–1921 and 1923–1931) totaling 22 years. As a member of the powerful Ways and Means committee, he fought for low tariffs and claimed authorship of the federal income tax laws of 1913 and 1916 and the inheritance tax of 1916. After his defeat in the congressional election of 1920, he served as chairman of the Democratic National Committee. He was one of several candidates for president at the 1928 Democratic National Convention, which ultimately chose Al Smith as nominee. secondnameplaceholder was influential in advising Albert Gore, Sr. to run for the U.S. Congress in 1938. secondnameplaceholder recorded twenty-five years of combined service in the House and the Senate.
<h2>Secretary of State</h2>
secondnameplaceholder won election to the Senate in 1930, but resigned from the Senate in 1933 to become Secretary of State. Roosevelt named him Secretary of State and appointed him to lead the American delegation to the London Economic Conference, but it collapsed when Roosevelt publicly rejected the main plans. In 1943, secondnameplaceholder served as United States delegate to the Moscow Conference. At all times, his main objective was to enlarge foreign trade and lower tariffs. The more important issue of the American role in World War II was handled by Roosevelt who worked through Sumner Welles, the second-ranking official at the State Department. secondnameplaceholder did not attend the summit meetings that Roosevelt had with Churchill and Stalin.[3] In 1943, secondnameplaceholder finally destroyed Welles's career by threatening to expose his homosexuality.[4]In a speech in 1937, New York City Mayor Fiorello H. La Guardia said that brown-shirted Nazis ought to be featured as the "climax" of a chamber of horrors in the upcoming World's Fair. The Nazi government organ, Der Angriff called the mayor a "Jewish Ruffian" who had been bribed by Jewish and Communistic agents and was a criminal disguised as an officeholder.[5] In the ensuing exchanges, secondnameplaceholder sent a letter of regret to Berlin for intemperate comments on both sides, but he also explained the principle of freedom of speech. As the response of Nazi propaganda organs rose in pitch to include characterizing American women as "prostitutes," secondnameplaceholder sent a letter of protest to Berlin, which elicited an "explanation" but no apology.[6]In 1938, secondnameplaceholder engaged in a famous dialog with Mexican Foreign Minister Eduardo Hay concerning the failure of Mexico to compensate Americans who lost farmlands during agrarian reforms in the late 1920s. He insisted that compensation must be "prompt, adequate and effective." Though the Mexican Constitution guaranteed compensation for expropriation or nationalization, nothing had yet been paid. While Hay admitted Mexico's responsibility, he replied that there is "no rule universally accepted in theory nor carried out in practice which makes obligatory the payment of immediate compensation...." The so-called "secondnameplaceholder formula" has been adopted in many treaties concerning international investment but is still controversial, especially in Latin American countries, which have historically subscribed to the Calvo doctrine, which suggests that compensation is to be decided by the host country and that as long as there is equality between nationals and foreigners and no discrimination, there can be no claim in international law. The tension between the secondnameplaceholder formula and the Calvo doctrine is still important in the law of international investment.secondnameplaceholder pursued the "Good Neighbor Policy" with Latin American nations, which has been credited with preventing Nazi subterfuge in that region. secondnameplaceholder and Roosevelt also maintained relations with Vichy France, which secondnameplaceholder credited with allowing General Henri Giraud's forces to join allied forces in the North African campaign against Germany.[7]secondnameplaceholder also handled formal statements with foreign governments. Notably he sent the secondnameplaceholder note just prior to the Pearl Harbor attack, which was formally titled "Outline of proposed Basis for Agreement Between The United States and Japan." secondnameplaceholder received news of the attack while he was outside his office. The Japanese ambassador Kichisaburō Nomura and Japan's special envoy Saburō Kurusu were waiting to see secondnameplaceholder with a 14-part message from the Japanese government that officially notified of a breakdown in negotiations. The United States had broken Japanese encryption, and secondnameplaceholder knew the message contents. He blasted the diplomats: "In all my fifty years of public service, I have never seen such a document that was more crowded with infamous falsehood and distortion."[8]secondnameplaceholder chaired the Advisory Committee on Postwar Foreign Policy, which was created in February 1942.When the Free French Forces of Charles de Gaulle occupied the islands of Saint-Pierre and Miquelon, south of Newfoundland, in December 1941, secondnameplaceholder lodged a very strong protest and even went as far as referring to the Gaullist naval forces as "the so-called Free French." His request to have the Vichy governor reinstated was met with strong criticism in the American press. However, the islands remained under the Free French until the end of the war.
<h2>SSSt. Louisincident</h2>
In 1939, secondnameplaceholder advised President Roosevelt to reject the SS St. Louis, a German ocean liner carrying 936 Jews seeking asylum from Germany. secondnameplaceholder's decision sent the Jews back to Europe on the eve of the Holocaust. Some historians estimate that 254 of the passengers were ultimately murdered by the Nazis.In September 1940, First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt maneuvered with another State Department official to bypass secondnameplaceholder's refusal to allow Jewish refugees aboard a Portuguese ship, the SS Quanza, to receive visas to enter the U.S. Through her efforts, the Jewish refugees disembarked on September 11, 1940, in Virginia.[10]
In a similar incident, American Jews sought to raise money to prevent the mass murder of Romanian Jews but were blocked by the State Department. "In wartime, in order to send money out of the United States, two government agencies had to sign a simple release- the Treasury Department under Henry Morgenthau and the State Department under Secretary firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder. Morgenthau signed immediately. The State Department delayed, delayed, and delayed, as more Jews were dying in the Transnistria camps."[11]In 1940 Jewish representatives in the USA lodged an official complaint against the discriminatory policies the State Department was using against the Jews. The results were fatal: the Secretary of State [firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder] gave strict orders to every USA consulate worldwide forbidding the issuing of visas to Jews ... At the same time a Jewish congressman petitioned the President [FDR], requesting his permission to allow twenty thousand Jewish children from Europe to enter the USA. The President totally ignored this petition as well as its sender.[12]
<h2>United Nations establishment</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was the underlying force and architect in the creation of the United Nations, as recognized by the 1945 Nobel Prize for Peace, an honor for which Franklin D. Roosevelt nominated him. During World War II, secondnameplaceholder and Roosevelt had worked toward the development of a world organization to prevent a third World War. secondnameplaceholder and his staff drafted the "Charter of the United Nations" in mid-1943.
<h2>Later years</h2>
secondnameplaceholder resigned on November 30, 1944 due to failing health. To this day he remains the longest-serving US Secretary of State, having served for eleven years and nine months in the post. Roosevelt described secondnameplaceholder upon his departure as "the one person in all the world who has done his most to make this great plan for peace (the United Nations) an effective fact". The Norwegian Nobel Committee honored secondnameplaceholder with the Nobel Peace Prize in 1945 in recognition of his efforts for peace and understanding in the Western Hemisphere, his trade agreements, and his work to establish the United Nations.In January 1948, secondnameplaceholder published his two-volume memoirs, an excerpt from which appeared in the New York Times.[13]
<h2>Personal life and death</h2>
At the age of 45, in 1917, he married a widow Rose Frances (Witz) Whitney secondnameplaceholder (1875–1954), of an Austrian Jewish family of Staunton, Virginia.  The couple had no children.  Mrs. secondnameplaceholder died at age 79, in Staunton, Virginia, in 1954.  She is buried in Washington D.C. at  Washington National Cathedral.secondnameplaceholder died on July 23, 1955, at age 83, at his home in Washington, D.C., after a lifelong struggle with familial remitting-relapsing sarcoidosis (often confused with tuberculosis). He is buried in the vault of the Chapel of St. Joseph of Arimathea in the Washington National Cathedral.
<h2>Legacy</h2>
secondnameplaceholder's memory is preserved by firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Dam on the Cumberland River near Carthage, Tennessee. The dam impounds firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Lake, covering approximately 12,000 acres (49 km2).His law school, Cumberland School of Law, continues to honor him with a firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Speaker's Forum and the Moot Court Room.firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Birthplace State Park, near Byrdstown, Tennessee, was established in 1997 to preserve secondnameplaceholder's birthplace and various personal effects secondnameplaceholder had donated to the citizens of Pickett County, including his Nobel Peace Prize.A segment of Kentucky highway routes 90, 63, and 163, from Interstate 65 at Mammoth Cave National Park south to the Tennessee State Line, is named "firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Highway".The firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Building, on Capital Hill in Nashville, Tennessee, is a secure 10 story building that contains the offices of the Tennessee Legislature.The Eisenhower Executive Office Building (formerly the Old Executive Office Building) in Washington, DC, next to the White House, contains the ornately decorated "firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Room" on the second floor, which is used for meetings. The room was firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's office when he served as U.S. Secretary of State.secondnameplaceholder is one of the presidential cabinet members who are characters in the musical Annie.[14]
<h2>Sources</h2>
Anglo-American Cooperation, 1933– 1938" (PhD dissertation, McGill University, 1996) online free bibliography pp 373–91.
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (January 8, 1867 – January 9, 1961) was an American economist,  sociologist and pacifist. Balch combined an academic career at Wellesley College with a long-standing interest in social issues such as poverty, child labor, and immigration, as well as settlement work to uplift poor immigrants and reduce juvenile delinquency.She moved into the peace movement at the start of World War I in 1914, and began collaborating with Jane Addams of Chicago. She became a central leader of the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom (WILPF) based in Switzerland,[1] for which she won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1946.[2]
<h2>Life</h2>
Balch was born to a prominent Yankee family in Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts, a neighborhood of Boston,[2] the daughter of Francis V. and Ellen (née Noyes) Balch. Her father was a successful lawyer and  one time secretary to United States Senator Charles Sumner.[3] She graduated from Bryn Mawr College in 1889 after reading widely in the classics and languages and focusing on economics. She did graduate work in Paris and published her research as Public Assistance of the Poor in France (1893). She did settlement housework in Boston before deciding on an academic career.[citation needed]She then studied at Harvard University, the University of Chicago, and the University of Berlin, and began teaching at Wellesley College in 1896. She focused on immigration, consumption, and the economic roles of women. In 1913, she was appointed to serve as Professor of Economics at Wellesley, following the resignation of political economist Katharine Coman, who had founded the Department.[4] That same year, Balch was promoted from Associate Professor to Professor of Political Economy and of Political and Social Science.[5]Balch served on numerous state commissions, such as the first commission on minimum wages for women. She was a leader of the Women's Trade Union League, which supported women who belonged to labor unions. She published a major sociological study of Our Slavic Fellow Citizens in 1910.[6]She was a longtime pacifist, and was a participant in Henry Ford's International Committee on Mediation. When the United States entered the war, she became a political activist opposing conscription in espionage legislation, and supporting the civil liberties of conscientious objectors. She collaborated with Jane Addams in the Women's Peace party and numerous other groups.[7]In a letter to the president of Wellesley, she wrote we should follow "the ways of Jesus." Her spiritual thoughts were that American economy was  "far from being in harmony with the principles of Jesus which we profess."[8] Wellesley College terminated her contract in 1919. Balch served as an editor of The Nation, a well-known magazine of political commentary.[6]Balch converted from Unitarianism and became a Quaker in 1921. She stated, "Religion seems to me one of the most interesting things in life, one of the most puzzling, richest and thrilling fields of human thought and speculation... religious experience and thought need also a light a day and sunshine and a companionable sharing with others of which it seems to me there is generally too little... The Quaker worship at its best seems to me give opportunities for this sort of sharing without profanation."[9]Her major achievements were just beginning, as she became an American leader of the international peace movement. In 1919, Balch played a central role in the International Congress of Women. It changed its name to the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom and was based in Geneva.She was hired by the League as its first international Secretary-Treasurer, administering the organization's activities. She helped set up summer schools on peace education and created new branches in over 50 countries. She cooperated with the newly established League of Nations regarding drug control, aviation, refugees, and disarmament. In World War II, she favored Allied victory and did not criticize the war effort, but she did support the rights of conscientious objectors.[10]
<h2>Nobel prize</h2>
She was nominated by Florence Paton,  Cyril Dumpleton, Cairine Wilson, John Herman Randall, Stanley Knowles, Rudolf Schümperli, John Sturge Stephens, W. J. M. van Eysinga, Lucy Noel-Buxton, Judah Leon Magnes, Agnus MacInnis, Lucas Middleton and sixteen Finnish law professors and MPs.[11]She won the 1946 Nobel Peace Prize for her work with the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom (WILPF).  She donated her share of the prize money to the WILPF.[6]  Her acceptance speech highlighted the issues of nationalism and efforts for international peace.[6]
<h2>Personal life</h2>
Balch never married.  She died the day after her 94th birthday.
<h2>Biography</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born in Livingston Manor, New York, Sullivan County, New York on May 25, 1865, and his family moved to Postville, Iowa in September of the same year. He attended Upper Iowa University, where he studied history and was an award-winning student debater. He transferred to Cornell University, where he received his bachelor's degree in 1888. He was influenced by Arthur Tappan Pierson one of the forces behind the Student Volunteer Movement for Foreign Missions, which was founded in 1886. secondnameplaceholder married Leila Ada White (1866-1952) in 1891 and had two sons and two daughters.In 1910, secondnameplaceholder, an American Methodist layperson, presided at the 1910 World Missionary Conference, which was an important milestone in the modern Protestant missions movement and some say the modern ecumenical movement.secondnameplaceholder and a colleague were offered free passage on the Titanic in 1912 by a White Star Line official who was interested in their work, but they declined and took the more humble liner the SS Lapland. According to a biography by C. Howard Hopkins, upon hearing of the news in New York City, the two men looked at each other and remarked that, "The Good Lord must have more work for us to do."[2]After touring Europe and promoting ecumenism, secondnameplaceholder traveled to Asia where, from October 1912 to May 1913, he held a series of 18 regional and national conferences, including in Ceylon, India, Burma, Malaya, China, Korea and Japan.[3]He also worked with Robert Hallowell Gardiner III to maintain relations with the Russian Orthodox Church and Archbishop Tikhon after the Russian Revolution.From 1920 until 1928, secondnameplaceholder served as the WSCF Chairperson. For his labors in both missions and ecumenism, as well as for peace, some historians consider him to be "the most widely traveled and universally trusted Christian leader of his time".[4]
<h2>Legacy</h2>
The papers of firstnameplaceholder R. secondnameplaceholder are held at the Yale Divinity School Library.[5]
<h2>Veneration</h2>
secondnameplaceholder is honored with a feast day on the liturgical calendar of the Episcopal Church (USA) on October 3.The high school of the Postville Community School District in Postville, Iowa is named after him.[6]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, 1st Baron Boyd-Orr, CH, DSO, MC, FRS, FRSE (23 September 1880 – 25 June 1971), styled Sir firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder from 1935 to 1949, was a Scottish teacher, medical doctor, biologist, nutritional physiologist, politician, businessman and farmer who was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for his scientific research into nutrition and his work as the first Director-General of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO).He was the co-founder and the first President (1960–1971) of the World Academy of Art and Science (WAAS).[5][6][7]
In 1945, he was elected President of the National Peace Council and was President of the World Union of Peace Organisations and the World Movement for World Federal Government.[8]
<h2>Early life and family background</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was born at Kilmaurs, near Kilmarnock, East Ayrshire, Scotland, the middle child in a family of seven children. His father, Robert Clark Orr, was a quarry owner, and a man of deep religious convictions, being a member of the Free Church of Scotland. His mother, Annie Boyd, was the daughter of another quarry master, wealthier than Robert Orr, and grandmaster of a Freemason's Lodge.He was taught to read at an early age by his widowed grandmother, who lived with the family.[9] The family home was well supplied with books, and his father was widely read in political, sociological and metaphysical subjects, as well as religion.  As he grew older, firstnameplaceholder would regularly discuss these subjects with his father, brothers, and visiting friends.[a] He took part in the regular family worship in the evenings.[9]When he was five years old, the family suffered a setback when a ship owned by Robert Orr was lost at sea. They had to sell their home in Kilmaurs, and moved to West Kilbride, a village on the North Ayrshire coast. According to Kay, the new house and environment were a great improvement on Kilmaurs, despite the family's reduced means. The major part of his upbringing took place in and around West Kilbride. Apart from a four-month break at age thirteen, he attended the village school until age nineteen, the last four years as a pupil-teacher. Religion was then an important part of junior education in Scotland, and the school gave him a good knowledge of the Bible, which stayed with him for the rest of his life.[10]At the age of thirteen, secondnameplaceholder won a bursary to Kilmarnock Academy, a significant achievement as such bursaries were then rare. The new school was some 20 miles (32 km) from his home in West Kilbride, but his father owned a quarry about two miles (3 km) from the Academy, and firstnameplaceholder was provided with accommodation nearby. His family cut short his education at the Academy because, at the expense of his school attendance, he was spending time with the quarry workers, who let him work the machinery, and from whom he picked up a "wonderful vocabulary of swear words".[10] After four months he returned to the village school in West Kilbride where he continued his education under the inspirational tutelage of Headmaster firstnameplaceholder G. Lyons.[10] There he became a pupil teacher at a salary of £10 for the first year, and £20 for the second. This was a particularly demanding time for the young secondnameplaceholder, as in addition to his teaching duties, and studying at home for his university entrance and teacher-training qualifications, he also had to work every day in his father's business.[10]
<h2>Glasgow University</h2>
After four years as a pupil-teacher, at the age of 19 he won a Queen's Scholarship to study at a teacher training college in Glasgow, plus a bursary which paid for his lodgings there. The course required attending classes at the college, in addition to following the three-year Arts course – based on classics –  at the university. As secondnameplaceholder had passed his university entrance examinations, the fees for the university were also covered. The university education was considered the more important part of the course.[11]secondnameplaceholder criticised the university course, because the hard work required to pass the exams did not allow sufficient time to meet and discuss with students of different social backgrounds.[b]
<h2>First encounters with poverty, and teaching career</h2>
As an undergraduate in Glasgow, he explored the interior of the city, usually at weekends. He was shocked by what he found in the poverty-stricken slums and tenements, which then made up a large part of the city. Rickets was obvious among the children, malnutrition (in some cases, associated with drunkenness) was shown by many of the adults, and many of the aged were destitute. In his first teaching job after graduating M.A. in 1902, he was posted to a school in the slums. His first class was overcrowded, and the children ill-fed or actually hungry, inadequately clothed, visibly lousy and physically wretched. He resigned after a few days, realising that he could not teach children in such a condition, and that there was nothing he could do to relieve their misery.[12]After working for a few months in his father's business, he taught for three years at Kyleshill School in Saltcoats, also a poor area, but less squalid than the slums of Glasgow. secondnameplaceholder needed to augment his teacher's salary, and decided to do so by instructing an evening class in book-keeping and accountancy. After intensive study he passed the necessary examinations, and duly instructed his class. The knowledge and skills he learned by studying for, and teaching, this class were to prove very useful in his later career.
<h2>Return to university</h2>
secondnameplaceholder realised that his heart was not in teaching, and after fulfilling his teaching obligations under the terms of his Queen's Scholarship, he returned to the University to study biology, a subject he had always been interested in since childhood. As a precaution, he entered simultaneously for a degree in medicine.He found the university to be a very stimulating environment. Diarmid Noel Paton (son of the artist Joseph Noel Paton) was Regius Professor of Physiology, and Edward Provan Cathcart head of Physiological Chemistry, both men of outstanding scientific ability. He was impressed by Samson Gemmell, Professor of Clinical Medicine,[13] a philosopher whose deep thinking on social affairs also influenced secondnameplaceholder's approach to such questions.[12]Half-way through his medical studies, his savings ran out. Reluctant to ask his family for support, he bought a block of tenanted flats on mortgage, with the help of a bank overdraft, and used the rents to pay for the rest of his studies. On graduating, he sold the property for a small profit.He graduated BSc in 1910, and M.B. Ch.B. in 1912, at the age of 32, placing sixth in a year of 200 students. Two years later, in 1914, he graduated M.D. with honours, receiving the Bellahouston Gold Medal for the most distinguished thesis of the year.
<h2>Research career</h2>
On leaving the university, he took a position as a ship's surgeon on a ship trading between Scotland and West Africa, choosing this job because it offered the possibility of paying off his bank overdraft faster than any other. He resigned after four months, when he had repaid the debt. He then tried general practice, working as a locum in the practice of his family doctor in Saltcoats, and was offered a partnership there. Realising that a career in medicine was not for him, he instead accepted the offer of a two-year Carnegie research scholarship, to work in E.P. Cathcart's laboratory. The work he began there covered malnutrition, protein[14] and creatine[15][16] metabolism, the effect of water intake on nitrogenous metabolism in humans,[17][18] and the energy expenditure of military recruits in training.[19]On 1 April 1914, secondnameplaceholder took charge of a new research institute in Aberdeen, a project of a joint committee for research into animal nutrition of the North of Scotland College of Agriculture and Aberdeen University. He had been offered the post on the recommendation of E.P. Cathcart, who had originally been offered the job, but had turned it down in favour of a chair in physiology in London.The joint committee had allocated a budget of £5,000 for capital expenditure and £1,500 for annual running costs. secondnameplaceholder recognised immediately that these sums were inadequate. Using his experience in his father's business of drawing up plans and estimating costs, he submitted a budget of £50,000 for capital expenditure and £5,000 for annual running costs. Meanwhile, with the £5,000 he had already been allocated he specified a building, not of wood as had been envisaged by the committee, but of granite and designed so that it could serve as a wing of his proposed £50,000 Institute. He accepted the lowest tender of £5,030, and told the contractors to begin work immediately. The committee were not pleased, but had to accept the fait accompli. When war broke out the contractors were told to finish the walls and roof, but to do no more for the time being.On the outbreak of the First World War he was given leave to join the British Army, and asked his former colleague E.P. Cathcart to help him obtain a medical commission in an infantry unit overseas. Cathcart thought he would be more useful at home, and his first commission was in a special civilian section of the R.A.M.C. dealing with sanitation. Several divisions of non-conscripted recruits were in training in emergency camps at home, some of them in very poor sanitary conditions. secondnameplaceholder was able to push through schemes for improvement in hygiene, preventing much sickness.[20]After 18 months he was posted as Medical Officer to an infantry unit, the 1st battalion Sherwood Foresters. He spent much of his time in shell holes, patching up the many wounded. His courage under fire and devotion to duty were recognised by the award of a Military Cross after the Battle of the Somme, and of the Distinguished Service Order after Passchendaele. He also made arrangements for the battalion's diet to be supplemented by vegetables collected from local deserted gardens and fields. As a result, unlike other units, he did not need to send any of the men in his medical charge to hospital. He also prevented his men getting trench foot by personally ensuring they were fitted with boots a size larger than usual.[20]Worried that he was losing touch with medical and nutritional advances, he asked to be transferred to the navy, where he thought he would have more time available for reading and research. The army was reluctant to let him go, but agreed, since he was still a civilian surgeon. He spent a busy three months in the naval hospital at Chatham, studying hard while practicing medicine in the wards, before being posted to HMS Furious. On board ship his medical duties were light, enabling him to do a great deal of reading. He was later recalled to work studying food requirements of the army.When secondnameplaceholder returned to Aberdeen in early 1919, his plan for a larger Institute had still not been accepted. Indeed, even his plans for the annual maintenance grant had to be approved by the Professor of Agriculture in Cambridge, Thomas Barlow Wood. Despite gaining the latter's support, his expansion plans were at first rebuffed, although he succeeded in having the annual grant increased to £4,000. In 1920 he was introduced to firstnameplaceholder Quiller Rowett, a businessman who seemed to have qualms of conscience[21] over the large profits he had made during the war. Shortly afterwards, the government agreed to finance half the cost of secondnameplaceholder's plan, provided he could raise the other half elsewhere. Rowett agreed to provide £10,000 for the first year, £10,000 for the second year, and gave an additional £2,000 for the purchase of a farm, provided that, "if any work done at the Institute on animal nutrition was found to have a bearing on human nutrition, the Institute would be allowed to follow up this work",[22] a condition the Treasury was willing to accept. By September 1922 the buildings were nearly completed, and the renamed Rowett Research Institute was opened shortly thereafter by Queen Mary.[23]secondnameplaceholder proved to be an effective fund-raiser from both government and private sources,[24] expanding the experimental farm to around 1,000 acres (4.0 km2), building a well-endowed library, and expanding the buildings. He also built a centre for accommodating students and scientists attracted by the institute's growing reputation, a reputation enhanced by secondnameplaceholder's many publications.[2] His research output suffered from the time and energy he had to devote to fund-raising, and in later life he said, "I still look with bitter resentment at having to spend half my time in the humiliating job of hunting for money for the Institute."[23]Through the 1920s, his own research was devoted mainly to animal nutrition, his focus changed to human nutrition both as a researcher and an active lobbyist and propagandist for improving people's diets. In 1927, he proved the value of milk being supplied to school children, which led to free school milk provision in the UK. His 1936 report "Food, Health and Income" showed that at least one third of the UK population were so poor that they could not afford to buy sufficient food to provide a healthy diet and revealed that there was a link between low-income, malnutrition and under-achievement in schools.[25]From 1929 to 1944, secondnameplaceholder was Consultant Director to the Imperial Bureau of Animal Nutrition, later the Commonwealth Bureau of Nutrition (part of the Commonwealth Agricultural Bureaux), which was based at the Rowett Research Institute. During the Second World War he was a member of Churchill's Scientific Committee on Food Policy and helped to formulate food rationing[25]
<h2>International and political work</h2>
In October 1945, Orr was elected Rector of the University of Glasgow after standing as an Independent Progressive candidate.[26] He was elected as an independent Member of Parliament (MP) for the Combined Scottish Universities in a by-election in April 1945,[27] and kept his seat at the general election shortly after. He resigned in 1946.[28]After the Second World War, secondnameplaceholder resigned from the Rowett Institute, and took several posts, most notably as Director-General of the United Nations' new Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO).[29][30] Although his tenure in this position was short (1945–1948), he worked not only to alleviate the immediate postwar food shortage through the International Emergency Food Committee (IEFC) but also to propose comprehensive plans for improving food production and its equitable distribution—his proposal to create a World Food Board to increase price stability by way of large scale commodity storage.  Although the board failed to get the support of Britain and the US, secondnameplaceholder laid a firm foundation for the new U.N. specialized agency.[31][32][33]He then resigned from the FAO and became director of a number of companies and proved a canny investor in the stock market, making a considerable personal fortune.  When he received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1949,[c] he donated the entire financial award to organizations devoted to world peace and a united world government.
He was elevated to the peerage in 1949 as Baron Boyd-Orr, of Brechin Mearns in the County of Angus.[34][35]In 1960 secondnameplaceholder was elected the first president of the World Academy of Art and Science, which was set up by eminent scientists of the day concerned about the potential misuse of scientific discoveries, most especially nuclear weapons.
<h2>Personal life</h2>
In 1915, secondnameplaceholder married Elizabeth Pearson Callum, whom he had met as a teenager in West Kilbride.[36][37] They had three children: Elizabeth Joan (born 1916), Helen Anne (born 1919) and Donald Noel (1921–1942).[38] His son was killed on active service during the Second World War.[6]
<h2>Death and legacy</h2>
secondnameplaceholder died on 25 June 1971 in Brechin, Scotland; he was 90 years old.[6]The University of Glasgow has a secondnameplaceholder Building and the secondnameplaceholder Centre for Population and Ecosystem Health[39] named after him, and the University's Hunterian Museum holds his Nobel medal. There is a street named after secondnameplaceholder in his home town of Kilmaurs in Ayrshire, as well as in Brechin, Angus, Penicuik, Midlothian, Aberdeen and in Saltcoats, Ayrshire.[citation needed]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder Johnson secondnameplaceholder (/bʌntʃ/; August 7, 1903 – December 9, 1971) was an American political scientist, diplomat, and leading actor in the mid-20th Century decolonization process and US civil rights movement, who received the 1950 Nobel Peace Prize for his late 1940s mediation in Israel. In the List of black Nobel laureates he is the first African American and first person of African descent to be awarded a Nobel Prize. He was involved in the formation and administration of the United Nations and played a major role in both the decolonization process and numerous peacekeeping operations sponsored by the UN. In 1963, he was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President John F. Kennedy.[1] At the UN, secondnameplaceholder gained such fame that Ebony magazine proclaimed him perhaps the most influential African American of the first half of the 20th Century and "[f]or nearly a decade, he was the most celebrated African American of his time both [in the US] and abroad."[2]secondnameplaceholder served on the US delegation to both the Dumbarton Oaks Conference in 1944 and United Nations Conference on International Organization in San Francisco in 1945 that drafted the UN charter. He then served on the American delegation to the first session of the United Nations General Assembly in 1946 and joined the UN as head of the Trusteeship Department, beginning a long series of troubleshooting roles and responsibilities related to decolonization. In 1948 he became an acting mediator for the Middle East, negotiating an armistice between Egypt and Israel. For this success he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1950. He continued to serve at the United Nations, working on crises in the Sinai (1956), the Congo (1960), Yemen (1963), Cyprus (1964) and Bahrain in 1970, reporting directly to the UN Secretary-General. He also chaired study groups dealing with water resources in the Middle East. In 1957 he was promoted to Under-Secretary-General for special political affairs, having prime responsibility for peacekeeping roles. In 1965 he supervised the cease-fire following the war between India and Pakistan. He retired from the UN in June 1971, six months before his death.[3]
<h2>Early life and education</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born in Detroit, in 1903 and baptized at the city's Second Baptist Church. When firstnameplaceholder was a child, his family moved to Toledo, Ohio, where his father looked for work. They returned to Detroit in 1909 after his sister Grace was born, with the help of their maternal aunt, Ethel Johnson. Their father did not live with the family again after Ohio and had not been "a good provider." But he followed them when they moved to New Mexico.Because of the declining health of his mother and uncle, the family moved to Albuquerque, New Mexico, in 1915. His mother, "'a musically inclined woman who contributed much to what her son called a household “bubbling over with ideas and opinions'", died in 1917, and his uncle shortly thereafter.[4] Thereafter, secondnameplaceholder was raised by firstnameplaceholder with his maternal grandmother, Lucy Taylor Johnson, who he credited with instilling in him his pride in his race and his self-belief.[5]In 1918, Lucy Taylor Johnson moved with the two secondnameplaceholder grandchildren to the South Central neighborhood of Los Angeles.[4][6] Fred secondnameplaceholder later remarried, and firstnameplaceholder never saw him again.secondnameplaceholder was a brilliant student, a debater, athlete and the valedictorian of his graduating class at Jefferson High School. He attended the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), and graduated summa cum laude and Phi Beta Kappa[7] in 1927 as the valedictorian of his class. Using the money his community raised for his studies and a graduate scholarship at Harvard University, he earned a doctorate in political science.
<h2>Academic career</h2>
secondnameplaceholder earned a master's degree in political science in 1928 and a doctorate in 1934, while he was already teaching in the Department of Political Science at Howard University, an historically black college. At the time, it was typical for doctoral candidates to start teaching before completion of their dissertations. He was the first African American to gain a PhD in political science from an American university. From 1936 to 1938, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder studied anthropology and conducted postdoctoral research at Northwestern University[8][9] in Evanston, Illinois, and at the London School of Economics (LSE), and later at the University of Cape Town in South Africa.He published his first book, World View of Race, in 1936, arguing that "race is a social concept which can be and is employed effectively to rouse and rationalize emotions [and] an admirable device for the cultivation of group prejudices." In 1940, secondnameplaceholder served as the chief research associate to Swedish sociologist Gunnar Myrdal's landmark study of racial dynamics in the U.S., An American Dilemma.For more than two decades (1928–1950), secondnameplaceholder served as chair of the Department of Political Science at Howard University, where he also taught. Furthermore, he contributed to the Howard School of International Affairs with his work regarding the effect racism and imperialism had on global economic systems and international relations.[10]secondnameplaceholder was elected to the American Philosophical Society in 1950. He was the first Black member to be inducted into the Society since its founding in 1743.[11] In 1953-54 he served as the President of the American Political Science Association.[12] He served as a member of the Board of Overseers of his alma mater, Harvard University (1960–1965), as a member of the board of the Institute of International Education, and as a trustee of Oberlin College, Lincoln University, and New Lincoln School.
<h2>World War II years</h2>
In 1941-43 secondnameplaceholder worked in the Office of Strategic Services (OSS), the wartime intelligence service, as a senior social analyst on Colonial Affairs. In 1943, he was transferred from the OSS to the State Department. He was appointed Associate Chief of the Division of Dependent Area Affairs under Alger Hiss. With Hiss, secondnameplaceholder became one of the leaders of the Institute of Pacific Relations (IPR). He participated in the preliminary planning for the United Nations at the San Francisco Conference of 1945.  In 2008, the U.S. National Archives and Records Administration released a 51-page PDF of his OSS records, which is available online.[13]
<h2>United Nations</h2>
Near the close of World War II in 1944, secondnameplaceholder took part in planning for the United Nations at the Dumbarton Oaks Conference, held in Washington, D.C. He was an adviser to the U.S. delegation for the Charter Conference of the United Nations held in 1945, when the governing document was drafted. Together with First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt, secondnameplaceholder was instrumental in the creation and adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948.  secondnameplaceholder urged African-Americans to take UN positions. "Negroes ought to get busy and prepare to obtain some of the jobs in the United Nations' set-up," he counseled. "There are going to be all kinds of jobs and Negroes should attempt to get jobs on all levels. Some organization should be working on this now."[14]According to the United Nations document, "firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder: Visionary for Peace," during his 25 years of service to the United Nations, hesecondnameplaceholder was instrumental in ending colonialism. His work to end colonialism began early in his academic career, during which time he developed into a leading scholar and expert of the impact of colonialism on subjugated people, and developed close relationships with many anti-colonialism leaders and intellectuals from the Caribbean and Africa, in particular during his field research and his time at the London School of Economics. Then, "[a]t the United Nations, secondnameplaceholder had a great deal to do with the end of colonialism, with the organization's evolution from mandates to trusteeship, and with the operation of the UN's Trusteeship Division. Indeed, secondnameplaceholder, as one of the principal authors of the chapters in the UN charter on non-self-determining territories and trusteeship, and later, as head of the Trusteeship Division of the UN, was a key architect of the institution of trusteeship."[15]Beginning in 1947, secondnameplaceholder was involved with trying to resolve the Arab–Israeli conflict in Palestine.  He served as assistant to the United Nations Special Committee on Palestine, and thereafter as the principal secretary of the UN Palestine Commission. In 1948, he traveled to the Middle East as the chief aide to Sweden's Count Folke Bernadotte, who had been appointed by the UN to mediate the conflict. These men chose the island of Rhodes for their base and working headquarters. In September 1948, Bernadotte was assassinated in Jerusalem by members of the underground Jewish Lehi group, which was led by Yitzhak Shamir.Following the assassination, secondnameplaceholder became the UN's chief mediator; he conducted all future negotiations on Rhodes. The representative for Israel was Moshe Dayan; he reported in memoirs that much of his delicate negotiation with secondnameplaceholder was conducted over a billiard table while the two were shooting pool. Optimistically, secondnameplaceholder commissioned a local potter to create unique memorial plates bearing the name of each negotiator. When the agreement was signed, secondnameplaceholder awarded these gifts. After unwrapping his, Dayan asked secondnameplaceholder what might have happened if no agreement had been reached. "I'd have broken the plates over your damn heads," secondnameplaceholder answered. For achieving the 1949 Armistice Agreements, secondnameplaceholder received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1950.[16][17] He continued to work for the United Nations, mediating in other strife-torn regions, including the Congo, Yemen, Kashmir, and Cyprus. secondnameplaceholder was appointed Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations in 1968.
<h2>Civil Rights Movement</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was actively involved in movements for black liberation in his pre-United Nations days, including through leadership positions with various civil rights organizations and as one of the leading scholars on the issue of race in the US and colonialism abroad. During his time at the United Nations, secondnameplaceholder remained a vocal supporter of the US Civil Rights Movement despite his activities being somewhat constrained by the codes governing international civil servants. He participated in the 1963 March on Washington, where Martin Luther King Jr. gave his "I Have a Dream" speech, and also, marching side-by-side with King, in the Selma to Montgomery march in 1965, which contributed to passage of the landmark Voting Rights Act of 1965 and federal enforcement of voting rights.[18]  As a result of his activism in the pre-war period, secondnameplaceholder was a topic of discussion in the House Un-American Activities Committee. However, he was never a communist or Marxist, and indeed came under very heavy attack from the pro-Soviet press during his career.[19]secondnameplaceholder lived in the Kew Gardens neighborhood of Queens, New York, in a home purchased with his Nobel Prize money, from 1953 until his death.[20] Like many other people of color, secondnameplaceholder continued to struggle against racism across the United States and sometimes in his own neighborhood. In 1959, he and his son, firstnameplaceholder, Jr., were denied membership in the West Side Tennis Club in the Forest Hills neighborhood of Queens.[21] After the issue was given national coverage by the press, the club offered the secondnameplaceholders an apology and invitation of membership. The official who had rebuffed them resigned. secondnameplaceholder refused the offer, saying it was not based on racial equality and was an exception based only on his personal prestige.[4] During his UN career, secondnameplaceholder turned down appointments from Presidents Harry Truman and John Kennedy, because of the Jim Crow laws still in effect in Washington, DC. Historian John Hope Franklin credits him with "creating a new category of leadership among African-Americans" due to his unique ability "to take the power and prestige he accumulated...to address the problems of his community."[22]
<h2>Marriage and family</h2>
While teaching at Howard University in 1928, secondnameplaceholder met Ruth Harris as one of his students. They later started seeing each other and married June 23, 1930. The couple had three children: Joan Harris secondnameplaceholder (b. 1931), Jane Johnson secondnameplaceholder (b. 1933), and firstnameplaceholder J. secondnameplaceholder, Jr. (b. 1943).[23] His grandson, firstnameplaceholder J. secondnameplaceholder III, is the General Secretary of the Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization, an international membership organization established to facilitate the voices of unrepresented and marginalised nations and peoples worldwide.On October 9, 1966, their daughter Jane secondnameplaceholder Pierce fell or jumped from the roof of her  apartment building in Riverdale, Bronx; her death was believed to be suicide. She left no note. She and her husband Burton Pierce, a Cornell alumnus and labor relations executive, had three children. Their apartment was on the first floor of the building.[24]
<h2>Death</h2>
secondnameplaceholder resigned from his position at the UN due to ill health, but this was not announced, as Secretary-General U Thant hoped he would be able to return soon. His health did not improve, and secondnameplaceholder died December 9, 1971, from complications of heart disease, kidney disease, and diabetes. He was 67.[4] He is buried in Woodlawn Cemetery in The Bronx, New York City.
<h2>Historic Places</h2>
Several of secondnameplaceholder's residences are listed on the National Register of Historic Places
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (1 July 1879 – 28 April 1954) was a French trade union leader who received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1951.[1]
<h2>Biography</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born in Pantin, Seine-Saint-Denis, France. secondnameplaceholder's father worked in a match factory in Aubervilliers. His secondary schooling ended when his father's earnings were stopped by a strike. He gained employment at the factory at age sixteen and immediately became an important part of the union. In 1900, secondnameplaceholder joined a strike against the use of the white phosphorus that blinded his father, was dismissed, and worked at a succession of jobs until union influence saw him reinstated.In 1906, he was elected by the local union as a representative to the General Confederation of Labour (CGT), where his abilities saw him quickly rise through the ranks of organized labour. By 1909 he became interim treasurer, and shortly afterwards became secretary-general of the organization, which he held until 1947. His goals as a trade unionist were the familiar ones of the early labour movement — the eight-hour day, the right to union representation and collective bargaining, and paid holidays. During the Popular Front, the 1936 Matignon Agreement, to which he was a signatory, awarded many of these rights to French workers.In the years before World War II, secondnameplaceholder organised several mass protests, and the organization he led protested against the war. However, once the war started, secondnameplaceholder supported his country and believed that a Nazi Germany victory would lead to the destruction of democracy in Europe. During the war, he was arrested and imprisoned in Buchenwald concentration camp.After the war, secondnameplaceholder split from the CGT to form the social-democrat Workers' Force (CGT-FO). In 1951, he was awarded the Nobel Peace prize.[1]In an international context, his work was instrumental in the setting up of the International Labour Organization (ILO), and was elected to high positions in international trade union bodies, including the International Federation of Trade Unions and its postwar kin the World Federation of Trade Unions until that body split.On his passing in 1954, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was interred in Le Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris.
<h2>Quotation</h2>
"I would not go so far as to say that the French trade unions attached greater importance to the struggle for peace than the others did; but they certainly seemed to take it more to heart." firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder[8]
(!!)Article(!/!)
Ludwig Philipp firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder OM (German: [ˈalbɛʁt ˈʃvaɪ̯t͡sɐ] (listen); 14 January 1875 – 4 September 1965) was an Alsatian polymath. He was a theologian, organist, musicologist, writer, humanitarian, philosopher, and physician. A Lutheran, secondnameplaceholder challenged both the secular view of Jesus as depicted by the historical-critical method current at this time, as well as the traditional Christian view. His contributions to the interpretation of Pauline Christianity concern the role of Paul's mysticism of "being in Christ" as primary and the doctrine of Justification by Faith as secondary.He received the 1952 Nobel Peace Prize for his philosophy of "Reverence for Life",[3] becoming the eighth Frenchman to be awarded that prize. His philosophy was expressed in many ways, but most famously in founding and sustaining the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Hospital in Lambaréné, which up to 1958 was situated in French Equatorial Africa, and after this in Gabon. As a music scholar and organist, he studied the music of German composer Johann Sebastian Bach and influenced the Organ Reform Movement (Orgelbewegung).
<h2>Early years</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born 14 January 1875 in Kaysersberg in Alsace, in what had less than four years previously become The Imperial Territory of Alsace-Lorraine in The German Empire; he later became a citizen of France after World War I, when Alsace became French territory. He was the son of Louis secondnameplaceholder and Adèle Schillinger.[4][5] He spent his childhood in Gunsbach, also in Alsace, where his father, the local Lutheran-Evangelical pastor of the EPCAAL, taught him how to play music.[6] The tiny village would become home to the Association Internationale firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (AIAS).[7] The medieval parish church of Gunsbach was shared by the Protestant and Catholic congregations, which held their prayers in different areas at different times on Sundays. This compromise arose after the Protestant Reformation and the Thirty Years' War. secondnameplaceholder, the pastor's son, grew up in this exceptional environment of religious tolerance, and developed the belief that true Christianity should always work towards a unity of faith and purpose.[8]secondnameplaceholder's first language was the Alsatian dialect of German. At the Mulhouse gymnasium he received his "Abitur" (the certificate at the end of secondary education) in 1893. He studied organ in Mulhouse from 1885 to 1893 with Eugène Munch, organist at the Protestant cathedral, who inspired secondnameplaceholder with his enthusiasm for the music of German composer Richard Wagner.[9] In 1893, he played for the French organist Charles-Marie Widor (at Saint-Sulpice, Paris), for whom Johann Sebastian Bach's organ music contained a mystic sense of the eternal. Widor, deeply impressed, agreed to teach secondnameplaceholder without fee, and a great and influential friendship thus began.[10]From 1893 secondnameplaceholder studied Protestant theology at the Kaiser Wilhelm University in Strasbourg. There he also received instruction in piano and counterpoint from professor Gustav Jacobsthal, and associated closely with Ernest Munch, the brother of his former teacher, organist of St William church, who was also a passionate admirer of J. S. Bach's music.[11] secondnameplaceholder served his one-year compulsory military service in 1894. secondnameplaceholder saw many operas of Richard Wagner in Strasbourg (under Otto Lohse) and in 1896 he managed to afford a visit to the Bayreuth Festival to see Wagner's Der Ring des Nibelungen and Parsifal, both of which impressed him. In 1898, he returned to Paris to write a PhD dissertation on The Religious Philosophy of Kant at the Sorbonne, and to study in earnest with Widor. Here he often met with the elderly Aristide Cavaillé-Coll. He also studied piano at that time with Marie Jaëll.[12] In 1899, secondnameplaceholder spent the summer semester at the University of Berlin and eventually obtained his theology degree at the University of Strasbourg.[13][14][15][16] He published his PhD thesis at the University of Tübingen in 1899.[17]In 1905, secondnameplaceholder began his study of medicine at the University of Strasbourg, culminating in the degree of M.D. in 1913.[13][16]
<h2>Music</h2>
secondnameplaceholder rapidly gained prominence as a musical scholar and organist, dedicated also to the rescue, restoration and study of historic pipe organs. With theological insight, he interpreted the use of pictorial and symbolical representation in J. S. Bach's religious music. In 1899, he astonished Widor by explaining figures and motifs in Bach's Chorale Preludes as painter-like tonal and rhythmic imagery illustrating themes from the words of the hymns on which they were based. They were works of devotional contemplation in which the musical design corresponded to literary ideas, conceived visually. Widor had not grown up with knowledge of the old Lutheran hymns.[18]The exposition of these ideas, encouraged by Widor and Munch, became secondnameplaceholder's last task, and appeared in the masterly study J. S. Bach: Le Musicien-Poète, written in French and published in 1905. There was great demand for a German edition, but, instead of translating it, he decided to rewrite it.[19] The result was two volumes (J. S. Bach), which were published in 1908 and translated into English by Ernest Newman in 1911.[20] Ernst Cassirer, a contemporaneous German philosopher, called it "one of the best interpretations" of Bach.[21] During its preparation secondnameplaceholder became a friend of Cosima Wagner, then resident in Strasbourg, with whom he had many theological and musical conversations, exploring his view of Bach's descriptive music, and playing the major Chorale Preludes for her at the Temple Neuf.[22] secondnameplaceholder's interpretative approach greatly influenced the modern understanding of Bach's music. He became a welcome guest at the Wagners' home, Wahnfried.[23] He also corresponded with composer Clara Faisst, who became a good friend.[24]His pamphlet "The Art of Organ Building and Organ Playing in Germany and France" (1906,[25] republished with an appendix on the state of the organ-building industry in 1927) effectively launched the 20th-century Orgelbewegung, which turned away from romantic extremes and rediscovered baroque principles—although this sweeping reform movement in organ building eventually went further than secondnameplaceholder had intended. In 1909, he addressed the Third Congress of the International Society of Music at Vienna on the subject. Having circulated a questionnaire among players and organ-builders in several European countries, he produced a very considered report.[26] This provided the basis for the International Regulations for Organ Building. He envisaged instruments in which the French late-romantic full-organ sound should work integrally with the English and German romantic reed pipes, and with the classical Alsace Silbermann organ resources and baroque flue pipes, all in registers regulated (by stops) to access distinct voices in fugue or counterpoint capable of combination without loss of distinctness: different voices singing the same music together.secondnameplaceholder also studied piano under Isidor Philipp, head of the piano department at the Paris Conservatory.In 1905, Widor and secondnameplaceholder were among the six musicians who founded the Paris Bach Society, a choir dedicated to performing J. S. Bach's music, for whose concerts secondnameplaceholder took the organ part regularly until 1913. He was also appointed organist for the Bach Concerts of the Orféo Català at Barcelona, Spain, and often travelled there for that purpose.[18] He and Widor collaborated on a new edition of Bach's organ works, with detailed analysis of each work in three languages (English, French, German). secondnameplaceholder, who insisted that the score should show Bach's notation with no additional markings, wrote the commentaries for the Preludes and Fugues, and Widor those for the Sonatas and Concertos: six volumes were published in 1912–14. Three more, to contain the Chorale Preludes with secondnameplaceholder's analyses, were to be worked on in Africa, but these were never completed, perhaps because for him they were inseparable from his evolving theological thought.[27]On departure for Lambaréné in 1913, he was presented with a pedal piano, a piano with pedal attachments to operate like an organ pedal-keyboard.[28] Built especially for the tropics, it was delivered by river in a huge dug-out canoe to Lambaréné, packed in a zinc-lined case. At first, he regarded his new life as a renunciation of his art, and fell out of practice, but after some time he resolved to study and learn by heart the works of Bach, Mendelssohn, Widor, César Franck, and Max Reger systematically.[29] It became his custom to play during the lunch hour and on Sunday afternoons. secondnameplaceholder's pedal piano was still in use at Lambaréné in 1946.[30] According to a visitor, Dr. Gaine Cannon, of Balsam Grove, N.C., the old, dilapidated piano-organ was still being played by Dr. secondnameplaceholder in 1962, and stories told that "his fingers were still lively" on the old instrument at 88 years of age.Sir Donald Tovey dedicated his conjectural completion of Bach's The Art of Fugue to secondnameplaceholder.secondnameplaceholder's recordings of organ-music, and his innovative recording technique, are described below.One of his pupils was conductor and composer Hans Münch.
<h2>Theology</h2>
In 1899, secondnameplaceholder became a deacon at the church of Saint Nicholas in Strasbourg. In 1900, with the completion of his licentiate in theology, he was ordained as curate, and that year he witnessed the Oberammergau Passion Play. In the following year he became provisional Principal of the Theological College of Saint Thomas, from which he had just graduated, and in 1903 his appointment was made permanent.[note 1]In 1906, he published Geschichte der Leben-Jesu-Forschung [History of Life-of-Jesus research]. This book, which established his reputation, was first published in English in 1910 as The Quest of the Historical Jesus. Under this title the book became famous in the English-speaking world. A second German edition was published in 1913, containing theologically significant revisions and expansions: this revised edition did not appear in English until 2001. In 1931, he published Mystik des Apostels Paulus (The Mysticism of Paul the Apostle); a second edition was published in 1953.In The Quest, secondnameplaceholder maintained that the life of Jesus must be interpreted in the light of Jesus' own convictions, which reflected late Jewish eschatology and apocalypticism.  secondnameplaceholder writes:secondnameplaceholder cross-referenced the many New Testament verses declaring imminent fulfilment of the promise of the World's ending within the lifetime of Jesus's original followers.[37][failed verification] He wrote that in his view, in the Gospel of Mark, Jesus speaks of a "tribulation", with his "coming in the clouds with great power and glory" (St. Mark), and states that it will happen but it has not: "This generation shall not pass, till all these things be fulfilled" (St. Matthew, 24:34) or, "have taken place" (Luke 21:32). Similarly, in 1st Peter 1:20, "Christ, who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world but was manifest in these last times for you", as well as "But the end of all things is at hand" (1 Peter 4:7) and "Surely, I come quickly." (Revelation 22:20).secondnameplaceholder concluded his treatment of Jesus with what has been called the most famous words of twentieth-century theology:“He comes to us as One unknown, without a name, as of old, by the lake-side, He came to those men who knew him not.  He speaks to us the same word:  ‘Follow thou me’ and sets us to the task which He has to fulfill for our time.  He commands.  And to those who obey Him, whether they be wise or simple, He will reveal Himself in the toils, the conflicts, the sufferings which they shall pass through in His fellowship, and as an ineffable mystery, they shall learn in their own experience Who He is.”  [38]In The Mysticism of Paul the Apostle, secondnameplaceholder first distinguishes between two categories of mysticism: primitive and developed.[39] Primitive mysticism "has not yet risen to a conception of the universal, and is still confined to naive views of earthly and super-earthly, temporal and eternal". Additionally, he argues that this view of a "union with the divinity, brought about by efficacious ceremonies, is found even in quite primitive religions".[39]On the other hand, a more developed form of mysticism can be found in the Greek mystery-cults that were popular in first-century A.D. society. These included the cults of Attis, Osiris, and Mithras. A developed form of mysticism is attained when the "conception of the universal is reached and a man reflects upon his relation to the totality of being and to Being in itself". secondnameplaceholder claims that this form of mysticism is more intellectual and can be found "among the Brahmans and in the Buddha, in Platonism, in Stoicism, in Spinoza, Schopenhauer, and Hegel".[40]Next, secondnameplaceholder poses the question: "Of what precise kind then is the mysticism of Paul?" He locates Paul between the two extremes of primitive mysticism and developed mysticism. Paul stands high above primitive mysticism, due to his intellectual writings, but never speaks of being one with God or being in God. Instead, he conceives of sonship to God as "mediated and effected by means of the mystical union with Christ".[41] He summarizes Pauline mysticism as "being in Christ" rather than "being in God".Paul's imminent eschatology (from his background in Jewish eschatology) causes him to believe that the kingdom of God has not yet come and that Christians are now living in the time of Christ. Christ-mysticism holds the field until God-mysticism becomes possible, which is in the near future.[42] Therefore, secondnameplaceholder argues that Paul is the only theologian who does not claim that Christians can have an experience of "being-in-God". Rather, Paul uses the phrase "being-in-Christ" to illustrate how Jesus is a mediator between the Christian community and God. Additionally, secondnameplaceholder explains how the experience of "being-in-Christ" is not a "static partaking in the spiritual being of Christ, but as the real co-experiencing of His dying and rising again". The "realistic" partaking in the mystery of Jesus is only possible within the solidarity of the Christian community.[42]One of secondnameplaceholder's major arguments in The Mysticism of Paul the Apostle is that Paul's mysticism, marked by his phrase "being in Christ", gives the clue to the whole of Pauline theology. Rather than reading justification by faith as the main topic of Pauline thought, which has been the most popular argument set forward by Martin Luther, secondnameplaceholder argues that Paul's emphasis was on the mystical union with God by "being in Christ". Jaroslav Pelikan, in his foreword to The Mysticism of Paul the Apostle, points out that:secondnameplaceholder contrasts Paul's "realistic" dying and rising with Christ to the "symbolism" of Hellenism. Although Paul is widely influenced by Hellenistic thought, he is not controlled by it. secondnameplaceholder explains that Paul focused on the idea of fellowship with the divine being through the "realistic" dying and rising with Christ rather than the "symbolic" Hellenistic act of becoming like Christ through deification.[44] After baptism, Christians are continually renewed throughout their lifetimes due to participation in the dying and rising with Christ (most notably through the Sacraments). On the other hand, the Hellenist "lives on the store of experience which he acquired in the initiation" and is not continually affected by a shared communal experience.[45]Another major difference between Paul's "realism" and Hellenistic "symbolism" is the exclusive nature of the former and the inclusive nature of the latter. secondnameplaceholder unabashedly emphasizes the fact that "Paul's thought follows predestinarian lines".[46] He explains, "only the man who is elected thereto can enter into relation with God".[47] Although every human being is invited to become a Christian, only those who have undergone the initiation into the Christian community through baptism can share in the "realistic" dying and rising with Christ.
<h2>Medicine</h2>
At the age of 30, in 1905, secondnameplaceholder answered the call of The Society of the Evangelist Missions of Paris, which was looking for a physician. The committee of this missionary society was not ready to accept his offer, considering his Lutheran theology to be "incorrect".[48] He could easily have obtained a place in a German evangelical mission, but wished to follow the original call despite the doctrinal difficulties. Amid a hail of protests from his friends, family and colleagues, he resigned his post and re-entered the university as a student in a three-year course towards the degree of Doctorate in Medicine, a subject in which he had little knowledge or previous aptitude. He planned to spread the Gospel by the example of his Christian labour of healing, rather than through the verbal process of preaching, and believed that this service should be acceptable within any branch of Christian teaching.Even in his study of medicine, and through his clinical course, secondnameplaceholder pursued the ideal of the philosopher-scientist. By extreme application and hard work, he completed his studies successfully at the end of 1911. His medical degree dissertation was another work on the historical Jesus, The Psychiatric Study of Jesus. He defended Jesus' mental health in it. In June 1912, he married Helene Bresslau, municipal inspector for orphans and daughter of the Jewish pan-Germanist historian Harry Bresslau.[49]In 1912, now armed with a medical degree, secondnameplaceholder made a definite proposal to go as a physician to work at his own expense in the Paris Missionary Society's mission at Lambaréné on the Ogooué river, in what is now Gabon, in Africa (then a French colony). He refused to attend a committee to inquire into his doctrine, but met each committee member personally and was at last accepted. Through concerts and other fund-raising, he was ready to equip a small hospital.[50] In early 1913, he and his wife set off to establish a hospital (firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Hospital) near an existing mission post. The site was nearly 200 miles (14 days by raft[51]) upstream from the mouth of the Ogooué at Port Gentil (Cape Lopez) (and so accessible to external communications), but downstream of most tributaries, so that internal communications within Gabon converged towards Lambaréné.In the first nine months, he and his wife had about 2,000 patients to examine, some travelling many days and hundreds of kilometres to reach him. In addition to injuries, he was often treating severe sandflea and crawcraw sores, framboesia (yaws), tropical eating sores, heart disease, tropical dysentery, tropical malaria, sleeping sickness, leprosy, fevers, strangulated hernias, necrosis, abdominal tumours and chronic constipation and nicotine poisoning, while also attempting to deal with deliberate poisonings, fetishism and fear of cannibalism among the Mbahouin.secondnameplaceholder's wife, Helene secondnameplaceholder, was an anaesthetist for surgical operations. After briefly occupying a shed formerly used as a chicken hut, in late 1913 they built their first hospital of corrugated iron, with two 13-foot rooms (consulting room and operating theatre) and with a dispensary and sterilising room in spaces below the broad eaves. The waiting room and dormitory (42 by 20 feet) were built, like native huts, of unhewn logs along a 30-yard path leading from the hospital to the landing-place. The secondnameplaceholders had their own bungalow and employed as their assistant Joseph, a French-speaking Galoa (Mpongwe) who first came as a patient.[52][53]After World War I broke out in July 1914, secondnameplaceholder and his wife, German citizens in a French colony when the countries were at war, were put under supervision by the French military at Lambaréné, where secondnameplaceholder continued his work.[54] In 1917, exhausted by over four years' work and by tropical anaemia, they were taken to Bordeaux and interned first in Garaison and then from March 1918 in Saint-Rémy-de-Provence. In July 1918, after being transferred to his home in Alsace, he was a free man again. At this time secondnameplaceholder, born a German citizen, had his parents' former (pre-1871) French citizenship reinstated and became a French citizen. Then, working as medical assistant and assistant-pastor in Strasbourg, he advanced his project on the philosophy of civilization, which had occupied his mind since 1900. By 1920, his health recovering, he was giving organ recitals and doing other fund-raising work to repay borrowings and raise funds for returning to Gabon. In 1922, he delivered the Dale Memorial Lectures in the University of Oxford, and from these in the following year appeared Volumes I and II of his great work, The Decay and Restoration of Civilization and Civilization and Ethics. The two remaining volumes, on The World-View of Reverence for Life  and a fourth on the Civilized State, were never completed.In 1924, secondnameplaceholder returned without his wife, with an Oxford undergraduate Noel Gillespie as his assistant. Everything was heavily decayed, and building and doctoring progressed together for months. He now had salvarsan for treating syphilitic ulcers and framboesia. Additional medical staff, nurse (Miss) Kottmann and Dr. Victor Nessmann,[55] joined him in 1924, and Dr. Mark Lauterberg in 1925; the growing hospital was manned by native orderlies. Later Dr. Trensz replaced Nessmann, and Martha Lauterberg and Hans Muggenstorm joined them. Joseph also returned. In 1925–6, new hospital buildings were constructed, and also a ward for white patients, so that the site became like a village. The onset of famine and a dysentery epidemic created fresh problems. Much of the building work was carried out with the help of local people and patients. Drug advances for sleeping sickness included Germanin and tryparsamide. Trensz conducted experiments showing that the non-amoebic strain of dysentery was caused by a paracholera vibrion (facultative anaerobic bacteria). With the new hospital built and the medical team established, secondnameplaceholder returned to Europe in 1927, this time leaving a functioning hospital at work.He was there again from 1929 to 1932. Gradually his opinions and concepts became acknowledged, not only in Europe, but worldwide. There was a further period of work in 1935. In January 1937, he returned again to Lambaréné and continued working there throughout World War II.The journalist James Cameron visited Lambaréné in 1953 (when secondnameplaceholder was 78) and found significant flaws in the practices and attitudes of secondnameplaceholder and his staff. The hospital suffered from squalor and was without modern amenities, and secondnameplaceholder had little contact with the local people.[56] Cameron did not make public what he had seen at the time: according to a BBC dramatisation, he made the unusual journalistic decision to withhold the story, and resisted the expressed wish of his employers to publish an exposé.[57]The poor conditions of the hospital in Lambaréné were also famously criticized by Nigerian professor and novelist Chinua Achebe in his essay on Joseph Conrad's novel Heart of Darkness: "In a comment which has often been quoted secondnameplaceholder says: 'The African is indeed my brother but my junior brother.' And so he proceeded to build a hospital appropriate to the needs of junior brothers with standards of hygiene reminiscent of medical practice in the days before the germ theory of disease came into being."[58]
<h2>Schweitzer's views</h2>
secondnameplaceholder considered his work as a medical missionary in Africa to be his response to Jesus' call to become "fishers of men" but also as a small recompense for the historic guilt of European colonizers:[59]secondnameplaceholder was one of colonialism's harshest critics. In a sermon that he preached on 6 January 1905, before he had told anyone of his plans to dedicate the rest of his life to work as a physician in Africa, he said:[60]secondnameplaceholder was nonetheless still sometimes accused of being paternalistic in his attitude towards Africans.[61] For instance, he thought that Gabonese independence came too early, without adequate education or accommodation to local circumstances. Edgar Berman quotes secondnameplaceholder as having said in 1960, "No society can go from the primeval directly to an industrial state without losing the leavening that time and an agricultural period allow."[62] secondnameplaceholder believed dignity and respect must be extended to blacks, while also sometimes characterizing them as children.[63] He summarized his views on European-African relations by saying "With regard to the negroes, then, I have coined the formula: 'I am your brother, it is true, but your elder brother.'"[63] Chinua Achebe has criticized him for this characterization, though Achebe acknowledges that secondnameplaceholder's use of the word "brother" at all was, for a European of the early 20th century, an unusual expression of human solidarity between Europeans and Africans.[58] secondnameplaceholder eventually emended and complicated this notion with his later statement that "The time for speaking of older and younger brothers has passed".[64]American journalist John Gunther visited Lambaréné in the 1950s and reported secondnameplaceholder's patronizing attitude towards Africans. He also noted the lack of Africans trained to be skilled workers.[65] By comparison, his English contemporary Dr. firstnameplaceholder Cook in Uganda had been training nurses and midwives since the 1910s, and had published a manual of midwifery in the local language of Luganda.[66] After three decades in Africa, secondnameplaceholder still depended on Europe for nurses.[67]
<h2>Reverence for life</h2>
The keynote of secondnameplaceholder's personal philosophy (which he considered to be his greatest contribution to mankind) was the idea of Reverence for Life ("Ehrfurcht vor dem Leben"). He thought that Western civilization was decaying because it had abandoned affirmation of life as its ethical foundation.In the Preface to Civilization and Ethics (1923) he argued that Western philosophy from Descartes to Kant had set out to explain the objective world expecting that humanity would be found to have a special meaning within it. But no such meaning was found, and the rational, life-affirming optimism of the Age of Enlightenment began to evaporate. A rift opened between this world-view, as material knowledge, and the life-view, understood as Will, expressed in the pessimist philosophies from Schopenhauer onward. Scientific materialism (advanced by Herbert Spencer and Charles Darwin) portrayed an objective world process devoid of ethics, entirely an expression of the will-to-live.secondnameplaceholder wrote, "True philosophy must start from the most immediate and comprehensive fact of consciousness, and this may be formulated as follows: 'I am life which wills to live, and I exist in the midst of life which wills to live.'"[68] In nature one form of life must always prey upon another. However, human consciousness holds an awareness of, and sympathy for, the will of other beings to live. An ethical human strives to escape from this contradiction so far as possible.Though we cannot perfect the endeavour we should strive for it: the will-to-live constantly renews itself, for it is both an evolutionary necessity and a spiritual phenomenon. Life and love are rooted in this same principle, in a personal spiritual relationship to the universe. Ethics themselves proceed from the need to respect the wish of other beings to exist as one does towards oneself. Even so, secondnameplaceholder found many instances in world religions and philosophies in which the principle was denied, not least in the European Middle Ages, and in the Indian Brahminic philosophy.For secondnameplaceholder, mankind had to accept that objective reality is ethically neutral. It could then affirm a new Enlightenment through spiritual rationalism, by giving priority to volition or ethical will as the primary meaning of life. Mankind had to choose to create the moral structures of civilization: the world-view must derive from the life-view, not vice versa. Respect for life, overcoming coarser impulses and hollow doctrines, leads the individual to live in the service of other people and of every living creature. In contemplation of the will-to-life, respect for the life of others becomes the highest principle and the defining purpose of humanity.[69]Such was the theory which secondnameplaceholder sought to put into practice in his own life. According to some authors, secondnameplaceholder's thought, and specifically his development of reverence for life, was influenced by Indian religious thought and in particular the Jain principle of ahimsa, or non-violence.[70] firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder noted the contribution of Indian influence in his book Indian Thought and Its Development:[71]Further on ahimsa and the reverence for life in the same book, he elaborates on the ancient Indian didactic work of the Tirukkural, which he observed that, like the Buddha and the Bhagavad Gita, "stands for the commandment not to kill and not to damage".[72][73] Translating several couplets from the work, he remarked that the Kural insists on the idea that "good must be done for its own sake" and said, "There hardly exists in the literature of the world a collection of maxims in which we find so much lofty wisdom."[72][73]
<h2>Later life</h2>
After the birth of their daughter (Rhena secondnameplaceholder Miller), firstnameplaceholder's wife, Helene secondnameplaceholder was no longer able to live in Lambaréné due to her health. In 1923, the family moved to Königsfeld im Schwarzwald, Baden-Württemberg, where he was building a house for the family. This house is now maintained as a secondnameplaceholder museum.[74]From 1939 to 1948, he stayed in Lambaréné, unable to go back to Europe because of the war. Three years after the end of World War II, in 1948, he returned for the first time to Europe and kept travelling back and forth (and once to the US) as long as he was able. During his return visits to his home village of Gunsbach, secondnameplaceholder continued to make use of the family house, which after his death became an archive and museum to his life and work. His life was portrayed in the 1952 movie Il est minuit, Docteur secondnameplaceholder, starring Pierre Fresnay as firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder and Jeanne Moreau as his nurse Marie. secondnameplaceholder inspired actor Hugh O'Brian when O'Brian visited in Africa. O'Brian returned to the United States and founded the Hugh O'Brian Youth Leadership Foundation (HOBY).secondnameplaceholder was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize of 1952,[75] accepting the prize with the speech, "The Problem of Peace".[76] From 1952 until his death he worked against nuclear tests and nuclear weapons with firstnameplaceholder Einstein, Otto Hahn and Bertrand Russell. In 1957 and 1958, he broadcast four speeches over Radio Oslo which were published in Peace or Atomic War. In 1957, secondnameplaceholder was one of the founders of The Committee for a Sane Nuclear Policy. On 23 April 1957, secondnameplaceholder made his "Declaration of Conscience" speech; it was broadcast to the world over Radio Oslo, pleading for the abolition of nuclear weapons. His speech ended, "The end of further experiments with atom bombs would be like the early sunrays of hope which suffering humanity is longing for."[77]Weeks prior to his death, an American film crew was allowed to visit secondnameplaceholder and Drs. Muntz and Friedman, both Holocaust survivors, to record his work and daily life at the hospital. The film The Legacy of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, narrated by Henry Fonda, was produced by Warner Brothers and aired once. It resides in their vault today in deteriorating condition. Although several attempts have been made to restore and re-air the film, all access has been denied.[78]In 1955, he was made an honorary member of the Order of Merit (OM) by Queen Elizabeth II.[79] He was also a chevalier of the Military and Hospitaller Order of Saint Lazarus of Jerusalem.secondnameplaceholder died on 4 September 1965 at his beloved hospital in Lambaréné, now in independent Gabon. His grave, on the banks of the Ogooué River, is marked by a cross he made himself.His cousin Anne-Marie secondnameplaceholder Sartre was the mother of Jean-Paul Sartre. Her father, Charles secondnameplaceholder, was the older brother of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's father, Louis Théophile.[80]secondnameplaceholder is often cited in vegetarian literature as being an advocate of vegetarianism in his later years.[81][82][83] secondnameplaceholder was not a vegetarian in his earlier life. For example, in 1950, biographer Magnus C. Ratter commented that secondnameplaceholder never "commit[ted] himself to the anti- vivisection, vegetarian, or pacifist positions, though his thought leads in this direction".[84] Biographer James Bentley has written that secondnameplaceholder became a vegetarian after his wife's death in 1957 and he was "living almost entirely on lentil soup".[85] In contrast to this, historian David N. Stamos has written that secondnameplaceholder was not a vegetarian in his personal life nor imposed it on his missionary hospital but he did help animals and was opposed to hunting.[86] Stamos noted that secondnameplaceholder held the view that evolution ingrained humans with an instinct for meat so it was useless in trying to deny it.[86]The firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Fellowship was founded in 1940 by secondnameplaceholder to unite US supporters in filling the gap in support for his Hospital when his European supply lines were cut off by war, and continues to support the Lambaréné Hospital today. secondnameplaceholder considered his ethic of Reverence for Life, not his hospital, his most important legacy, saying that his Lambaréné Hospital was just "my own improvisation on the theme of Reverence for Life. Everyone can have their own Lambaréné". Today ASF helps large numbers of young Americans in health-related professional fields find or create "their own Lambaréné" in the US or internationally. ASF selects and supports nearly 250 new US and Africa secondnameplaceholder Fellows each year from over 100 of the leading US schools of medicine, nursing, public health, and every other field with some relation to health (including music, law, and divinity). The peer-supporting lifelong network of "secondnameplaceholder Fellows for Life" numbered over 2,000 members in 2008, and is growing by nearly 1,000 every four years. Nearly 150 of these secondnameplaceholder Fellows have served at the Hospital in Lambaréné, for three-month periods during their last year of medical school.[87]
<h2>International Albert Schweitzer Prize</h2>
The prize was first awarded on 29 May 2011 to Eugen Drewermann and the physician couple Rolf and Raphaela Maibach in Königsfeld im Schwarzwald, where secondnameplaceholder's former residence now houses the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Museum.[88]
<h2>Sound recordings</h2>
Recordings of secondnameplaceholder playing the music of Bach are available on CD. During 1934 and 1935 he resided in Britain, delivering the Gifford Lectures at Edinburgh University, and those on Religion in Modern Civilization at Oxford and London. He had originally conducted trials for recordings for HMV on the organ of the old Queen's Hall in London. These records did not satisfy him, the instrument being too harsh. In mid-December 1935 he began to record for Columbia Records on the organ of All Hallows, Barking-by-the-Tower, London.[89] Then at his suggestion the sessions were transferred to the church of Ste Aurélie in Strasbourg, on a mid-18th-century organ by Johann Andreas Silbermann (brother of Gottfried), an organ-builder greatly revered by Bach, which had been restored by the Lorraine organ-builder Frédéric Härpfer shortly before the First World War. These recordings were made in the course of a fortnight in October 1936.[90]secondnameplaceholder developed a technique for recording the performances of Bach's music. Known as the "secondnameplaceholder Technique", it is a slight improvement on what is commonly known as mid-side. The mid-side sees a figure-8 microphone pointed off-axis, perpendicular to the sound source. Then a single cardioid microphone is placed on axis, bisecting the figure-8 pattern. The signal from the figure-8 is mult-ed, panned hard left and right, one of the signals being flipped out of polarity. In the secondnameplaceholder method, the figure-8 is replaced by two small diaphragm condenser microphones pointed directly away from each other. The information that each capsule collects is unique, unlike the identical out-of-polarity information generated from the figure-8 in a regular mid-side. The on-axis microphone is often a large diaphragm condenser. The technique has since been used to record many modern instruments.Altogether his early Columbia discs included 25 records of Bach and eight of César Franck. The Bach titles were mainly distributed as follows:Later recordings were made at Parish church, Günsbach: These recordings were made by C. Robert Fine during the time Dr. secondnameplaceholder was being filmed in Günsbach for the documentary "firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder". Fine originally self-released the recordings but later licensed the masters to Columbia.The above were released in the United States as Columbia Masterworks boxed set SL-175.
<h2>Portrayals</h2>
Dramatisations of secondnameplaceholder's life include:
<h2>Early life and education</h2>
firstnameplaceholder Catlett secondnameplaceholder Jr. was born in Uniontown, Pennsylvania, the youngest of three children born to firstnameplaceholder Catlett secondnameplaceholder and Laura Emily (née Bradford) secondnameplaceholder.[10][11] He was a scion of an old Virginia family, as well as a first cousin, three times removed, of former Chief Justice John secondnameplaceholder.[12][13] secondnameplaceholder's father was active in the coal and coke business.[11] Later, when asked about his political allegiances, secondnameplaceholder often joked that his father had been a Democrat and his mother a Republican, whereas he was an Episcopalian.[14]secondnameplaceholder was educated at Miss Alcinda Thompson's private school in Uniontown and spent a year at Uniontown's Central School.[11] Having decided early in life that he desired a career in the military, but unlikely to obtain an appointment to the United States Military Academy because of his average grades, he looked to the Virginia Military Institute (VMI) for a formal education.[15] secondnameplaceholder's brother Stuart, a VMI alumnus, believed firstnameplaceholder would not succeed and argued that their mother not to let firstnameplaceholder attend out of concern that he would "disgrace the family name."[16] Determined to "wipe his brother's face," secondnameplaceholder enrolled at the age of sixteen in December 1897.[10][17] To pay for his tuition and expenses, secondnameplaceholder's mother sold parcels of land she owned in Uniontown and Augusta, Kentucky.[15]At the start of his college career, secondnameplaceholder was subjected to a hazing incident in which upperclassmen positioned an unsheathed bayonet with the point up and directed him to squat over it.[18] After twenty minutes, secondnameplaceholder fainted and fell.[19] When he awoke, he had a deep laceration to one of his buttocks.[19] While being treated for his injury, secondnameplaceholder refused to inform on his classmates.[19] Impressed with his bravery, the hazers never bothered him again.[19]During his years at VMI, secondnameplaceholder always ranked first in military discipline and about midway academically.[10] He attained the rank of first captain, the highest a cadet could achieve, and graduated 15th of 34 in the Class of 1901.[10][20][a] He played offensive tackle on the football team and in 1900 he was selected for All-Southern honors.[22]
<h2>Early infantry career and the Philippines</h2>
Following his graduation from VMI, secondnameplaceholder served as Commandant of Students at the Danville Military Institute in Danville, Virginia.[23] He took a competitive examination for a commission in the United States Army, which had greatly expanded to deal with the war with Spain and the occupation of the Philippines.[24]:23 secondnameplaceholder passed, and used endorsements his father obtained from both of Pennsylvania's U.S. Senators to bolster his application.[24]:23 VMI Superintendent Scott Shipp also supported secondnameplaceholder's application, and in a letter to President William McKinley compared him favorably to other VMI graduates serving in the Army, saying secondnameplaceholder was "Fully the equal of the best."[25]:18 He was commissioned a second lieutenant of Infantry in February 1902.[24]:23 In a matter of days he married, resigned the Danville job, and shipped out to serve with the 30th Infantry Regiment in the Philippines.[24]:23 [26]Prior to World War I, secondnameplaceholder received various postings in the United States and the Philippines, including serving as an infantry platoon leader and company commander during the Philippine–American War and other guerrilla uprisings.[10] He was schooled in modern warfare, including a tour at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas from 1906 to 1910 as both a student and an instructor.[27] He was the Honor Graduate of his Infantry-Cavalry School Course in 1907, and graduated first in his 1908 Army Staff College class.[10]After another tour of duty in the Philippines, secondnameplaceholder returned in 1916 to serve as aide-de-camp to the commander of the Western Department, former Army chief of staff Major General J. Franklin Bell, at the Presidio of San Francisco.[28] After the United States declared war on Germany in April 1917, secondnameplaceholder relocated with Bell to Governors Island, New York when Bell was reassigned as commander of the Department of the East.[29] Shortly afterwards, secondnameplaceholder was assigned to help oversee the mobilization of the 1st Division for service in France.[10]
<h2>World War I</h2>
During World War I, secondnameplaceholder had roles as a planner of both training and operations. In the summer of 1917, he was assigned as assistant chief of staff for operations on the staff of the 1st Division.[10] After overseeing the division's mobilization and organization in Texas, he departed for France with the division staff in mid-1917.[10]  On the long ocean voyage, his roommate was the division's assistant chief of staff for training, Lesley J. McNair;[30] the two formed a personal and professional bond that they maintained for the rest of their careers.[30]After arriving in France, secondnameplaceholder served with the 1st Division on the St. Mihiel, Picardy, and Cantigny fronts.[10] In late 1917, John J. Pershing, the commander of the American Expeditionary Force, inspected the 1st Division.[24]:29 Unimpressed by what he observed, Pershing began to berate division commander William L. Sibert in front of Sibert's staff.[24]:29 Sibert took Pershing's criticism in silence, but when Pershing turned his attention to the division chief of staff, secondnameplaceholder angrily interceded to inform Pershing of logistical and administrative difficulties of which Pershing was unaware.[31] secondnameplaceholder also informed Pershing that the AEF staff had not been very helpful in dealing with the problems.[24]:29 The division commander and staff were concerned that secondnameplaceholder's willingness to confront Pershing had probably cost him his career.[24]:29 Instead, Pershing began to seek out secondnameplaceholder and ask for his advice.[24]:29secondnameplaceholder won recognition and acclaim for his planning of the Battle of Cantigny, which took place from May 28 to 31, 1918;[10] secondnameplaceholder's success resulted in the first notable American victory of the war.[32] On May 26, secondnameplaceholder was injured while traveling to several subordinate units to conduct pre-attack coordination.[33] As he departed the division headquarters area, his horse stumbled, fell, and rolled over;[34] secondnameplaceholder's left foot was caught in the stirrup, and he sustained a severe sprain and bruise.[34] A physician bound secondnameplaceholder's injured ankle and foot with adhesive tape so that he could avoid medical evacuation and remain with the division to oversee the attack.[35] secondnameplaceholder was awarded the Citation Star for his heroism during this battle.[36] When the Silver Star medal was created in 1932, Citation Stars were converted to the new award.[36][37]In mid-1918, Pershing brought secondnameplaceholder on to the AEF operations staff, G-3, where he worked closely with Pershing and was a key planner of American operations.[10] He was instrumental in the planning and coordination of the Meuse-Argonne Offensive, which contributed to the defeat of the German Army on the Western Front in 1918.[38]  secondnameplaceholder held the permanent rank of captain and the temporary rank of colonel;[39] He was recommended for promotion to temporary brigadier general in October 1918, but the Armistice occurred before the recommendation was acted on.[40] After the Armistice, secondnameplaceholder served as chief of staff for the U.S. Eighth Corps.[10]
<h2>Between the wars</h2>
After the war, secondnameplaceholder reverted to his permanent rank of captain.[40] In 1919, he became an aide-de-camp to General Pershing.[10] Between 1920 and 1924, while Pershing was Army Chief of Staff, secondnameplaceholder worked on a number of projects that focused on training and teaching modern, mechanized warfare. He taught at the Army War College and was a key planner in the War Department.[10] He then served as executive officer of the 15th Infantry Regiment in China, where he remained for three years and learned to speak basic Mandarin.[10] In 1927, as a lieutenant colonel, he was appointed assistant commandant of the Infantry School at Fort Benning, where he initiated major changes to modernize command and staff processes, which proved to be of major benefit during World War II.[10] secondnameplaceholder placed Edwin F. Harding in charge of the Infantry School's publications, and Harding became editor[41]:41 of Infantry in Battle, a book that codified the lessons of World War I. Infantry in Battle is still used as an officer's training manual in the Infantry Officer's Course and was the training manual for most of the infantry officers and leaders of World War II.From June 1932 to June 1933, secondnameplaceholder was the commanding officer of the 8th Infantry Regiment at Fort Screven, Georgia.[10] From July 1933 to October 1933 he was commander of Fort Moultrie, South Carolina and District I of the Civilian Conservation Corps, and he was promoted to colonel in September 1933.[10] He was senior instructor and chief of staff for the Illinois National Guard's 33rd Division from November 1933 to August 1936.[10]secondnameplaceholder commanded the 5th Brigade of the 3rd Infantry Division and Vancouver Barracks in Vancouver, Washington from 1936 to 1938, and was promoted to brigadier general in October 1936.[10] In addition to obtaining a long-sought and significant troop command, traditionally viewed as an indispensable step to the pinnacle of the US Army, secondnameplaceholder was also responsible for 35 Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) camps in Oregon and southern Washington.[10] As post commander secondnameplaceholder made a concerted effort to cultivate relations with the city of Portland and to enhance the image of the US Army in the region. With the CCC, he initiated a series of measures to improve the morale of the participants and to make the experience beneficial in their later life. He started a newspaper for the CCC region that provided a vehicle to promote CCC successes, and he initiated a variety of programs that developed participants' skills and improved their health. secondnameplaceholder's inspections of the CCC camps gave him and his wife Katherine the chance to enjoy the beauty of the American northwest and made that assignment what he called "the most instructive service I ever had, and the most interesting."[42]In July 1938, secondnameplaceholder was assigned to the War Plans Division in Washington, D.C. and subsequently reassigned as Deputy Chief of Staff. In that capacity, then-Brigadier General secondnameplaceholder attended a White House conference at which President Franklin D. Roosevelt proposed a plan to provide aircraft to England in support of the war effort. With all other attendees voicing support, secondnameplaceholder was the only one to disagree, pointing out the lack of consideration for logistical support or training. secondnameplaceholder also spoke in favor of a large ground army although Roosevelt had said a large air force would be a greater deterrent to enemies.[43] Despite others' belief then that secondnameplaceholder had ended his career, his willingness to express disagreement resulted in Roosevelt nominating secondnameplaceholder to be the Army Chief of Staff. At the time of the appointment, secondnameplaceholder was only 34th in seniority, outranked by 21 major generals and 11 brigadier generals, but he was fifth under an unwritten rule that the chief of staff should be able to serve a four-year term before reaching the mandatory retirement age of 64.[44]Upon the retirement of General Malin Craig on July 1, 1939, secondnameplaceholder became acting chief of staff.[45] secondnameplaceholder was promoted to general and sworn in as chief of staff on September 1, 1939, the same day the German Army launched its invasion of Poland.[46] He held this post until retiring in November 1945.[47]On May 11, 1940 the United States Congress cut $10 million from a $28 million appropriation budget for equipment to detect Japanese aircraft off the west coast of America. secondnameplaceholder met with Secretary of the Treasury Henry Morgenthau Jr. and they went to see Roosevelt; secondnameplaceholder emphasized the supreme importance of getting the full amount and told Roosevelt "you have got to do something and you've got to do it today". secondnameplaceholder's advocacy worked and he got "all he wanted and more".[48]In 1941, secondnameplaceholder became a Freemason, raised "at sight" by the Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of the District of Columbia.[49] ("At sight" is the procedure by which a Grand Master confers on a candidate all three Masonic degrees - Apprentice, Fellowcraft, and Master - at one time.)[49]
<h2>World War II</h2>
As Chief of Staff, secondnameplaceholder organized the largest military expansion in U.S. history, inheriting an outmoded, poorly equipped army of 189,000 men and, partly drawing from his experience teaching and developing techniques of modern warfare as an instructor at the Army War College, coordinated the large-scale expansion and modernization of the U.S. Army. Though he had never actually led troops in combat, secondnameplaceholder was a skilled organizer with a talent for inspiring other officers.[50]  Many of the American generals who were given top commands during the war were either picked or recommended by secondnameplaceholder, including Dwight D. Eisenhower, Jacob L. Devers, firstnameplaceholder S. Patton, Terry de la Mesa Allen Sr., Lloyd Fredendall, Lesley McNair, Mark Wayne Clark and Omar Bradley.[51]Faced with the necessity of turning an army of former civilians into a force of over eight million soldiers by 1942 (a fortyfold increase within three years), secondnameplaceholder directed McNair to focus efforts on rapidly producing large numbers of soldiers. With the exception of airborne forces, secondnameplaceholder approved McNair's concept of an abbreviated training schedule for men entering Army land forces training, particularly in regard to basic infantry skills, weapons proficiency, and combat tactics.[52][53]  At the time, most U.S. commanders at lower levels had little or no combat experience of any kind. Without the input of experienced British or Allied combat officers on the nature of modern warfare and enemy tactics, many resorted to formulaic training methods emphasizing static defense and orderly large-scale advances by motorized convoys over improved roads.[54]  In consequence, Army forces deploying to Africa in Operation Torch suffered serious initial reverses when encountering German armored combat units in Africa in the Battle of Kasserine Pass and other major battles.[55]  Even as late as 1944, U.S. soldiers undergoing stateside training in preparation for deployment against German forces in Europe were not being trained in combat procedures and tactics in use there.[56]Originally, secondnameplaceholder had planned a 265-division Army with a system of unit rotation such as practiced by the British and other Allies.[57]  By mid-1943, however, after pressure from government and business leaders to preserve manpower for industry and agriculture, he had abandoned this plan in favor of a 90-division Army using individual replacements sent via a circuitous process from training to divisions in combat.[57]  The individual replacement system devised by secondnameplaceholder and implemented by McNair exacerbated problems with unit cohesion and effective transfer of combat experience to new soldiers and officers.[55][58] In Europe, where there were few pauses in combat with German forces, the individual replacement system had broken down completely by late 1944.[59]  Hastily-trained replacements or service personnel reassigned as infantry were often given only a few weeks' refresher training before being thrown into battle with Army divisions locked in front-line combat.The new men were often not even proficient in the use of their own weapons, and once in combat, could not receive enough practical instruction from veterans before being killed or wounded, sometimes within the first few days.[55][60][61]  Under such conditions, many soldiers suffered a crippling loss of morale, while veterans were kept at the front until they were killed, wounded, or incapacitated by battle fatigue or illness. Incidents of soldiers going AWOL from combat duty as well as battle fatigue and self-inflicted injury rose rapidly during the last eight months of the war with Germany.[55][58][60]  As one historian concluded, "Had the Germans been given a free hand to devise a replacement system..., one that would do the Americans the most harm and the least good, they could not have done a better job."[60][62]secondnameplaceholder's abilities to pick competent field commanders during the early part of the war was decidedly mixed. He was instrumental in advancing the careers of the highly capable generals such as Eisenhower, Bradley, Patton, Krueger and Clark.  A notable exception was his recommendation of the swaggering Fredendall to Eisenhower for a major command in the American invasion of North Africa during Operation Torch. secondnameplaceholder was especially fond of Fredendall, describing him as "one of the best" and remarking in a staff meeting when his name was mentioned, "I like that man; you can see determination all over his face."  Eisenhower duly picked him to command the 39,000-man Central Task Force (the largest of three) in Operation Torch. Both men would come to regret that decision, as Fredendall was the leader of U.S. Army forces at the disastrous Battle of the Kasserine Pass.[51]During World War II, secondnameplaceholder was instrumental in preparing the U.S. Army and Army Air Forces for the invasion of the European continent. secondnameplaceholder wrote the document that would become the central strategy for all Allied operations in Europe. He initially scheduled Operation Overlord for April 1, 1943, but met with strong opposition from Winston Churchill, who convinced Roosevelt to commit troops to Allied invasion of Sicily for the invasion of Italy.[63] Some authors think that World War II could have ended earlier if secondnameplaceholder had had his way; others think that such an invasion would have meant utter failure.[64]It was assumed that secondnameplaceholder would become the Supreme Commander of Operation Overlord, but Roosevelt selected Eisenhower as Supreme Commander. While secondnameplaceholder enjoyed considerable success in working with Congress and Roosevelt, he refused to lobby for the position. President Roosevelt didn't want to lose his presence in the States. He told secondnameplaceholder, "I didn't feel I could sleep at ease if you were out of Washington."[65]  When rumors circulated that the top job would go to secondnameplaceholder, many critics viewed the potential transfer as a demotion for secondnameplaceholder, since he would leave his position as Chief of Staff of the Army and lose his seat on the Combined Chiefs of Staff.[66]On December 16, 1944, secondnameplaceholder became the first American Army general to be promoted to five-star rank, the newly created General of the Army – the American equivalent rank to field marshal.[67] He was the second American to be promoted to a five-star rank, as William Leahy was promoted to fleet admiral the previous day.Throughout the remainder of World War II, secondnameplaceholder coordinated Allied operations in Europe and the Pacific. He was characterized as the organizer of Allied victory by Winston Churchill. Time magazine named secondnameplaceholder Man of the Year for 1943.[6] secondnameplaceholder resigned his post of chief of staff on November 18, 1945, but did not retire, as regulations stipulate that Generals of the Army remain on active duty for life.  He was succeeded as Army chief of staff by General of the Army Dwight Eisenhower.[7]
<h2>Analysis of Pearl Harbor intelligence failure</h2>
After World War II ended, the Congressional Joint Committee on the Investigation of the Pearl Harbor Attack received testimony on the intelligence failure. It amassed 25,000 pages of documents, 40 volumes, and included nine reports and investigations, eight of which had been previously completed. These reports included criticism of secondnameplaceholder for delay in sending General Walter Short, the Army commander in Hawaii, important information obtained from intercepted Japanese diplomatic messages. The report also criticized secondnameplaceholder's lack of knowledge of the readiness of the Hawaiian Command during November and December 1941.[68] Ten days after the attack, Lt. General Short and Admiral Husband E. Kimmel, commander of the Navy at Pearl Harbor, were both relieved of their duties. The final report of the Joint Committee did not single out or fault secondnameplaceholder. While the report was critical of the overall situation, the committee noted that subordinates had failed to pass on important information to their superiors, including secondnameplaceholder.[69][70]A secret report into the Army's role, the Clausen Report was authorized by Secretary Henry Stimson; it was critical of Short and also of Colonel Bratton who, he concluded, arrived later on Sunday morning than he initially claimed during testimony and invented a story about not being able to get in touch with secondnameplaceholder which "nearly destroyed" secondnameplaceholder.[71]
<h2>Post war: China</h2>
President Harry Truman in December 1945  sent secondnameplaceholder to China, where he had served in the 1920s.  His new mission was to broker a coalition government between the Nationalist allies under Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek and Communists under Mao Zedong. Mao promised secondnameplaceholder the Communists would give up armed revolution, embrace the old enemies, and build a democracy in China. secondnameplaceholder hoped for a coalition government, and toasted their common future.  The Americans assumed that if the Communists won the Civil War, they would remain on friendly terms with the United States.[72]  secondnameplaceholder had no leverage over the Communists, but he threatened to withdraw American aid essential to the Nationalists. Both sides rejected his proposals and the Chinese Civil War escalated, with the Communists winning in 1949. His mission a failure, he returned to the United States in January 1947.[73][74] Chiang Kai-shek and some historians later claimed that cease-fire, under pressure of secondnameplaceholder, saved the Communists from defeat.[75] As Secretary of State in 1947–48, secondnameplaceholder seems to have disagreed with strong opinions in The Pentagon and State Department that Chiang's success was vital to American interests, insisting that U.S. troops not become involved.
<h2>Secretary of State</h2>
After secondnameplaceholder's return to the U.S. in early 1947, Truman appointed secondnameplaceholder Secretary of State. As one of the most well-regarded and least politicized national leaders, he made an ideal front office personality. He became the spokesman for the State Department's ambitious plans to rebuild Europe. He did not design the plans, and paid little to details or negotiations. He did not keep current on details of foreign affairs. As one biographer notes, he had never been a workaholic. He turned over major responsibilities to his deputies, especially Under-Secretary Robert A. Lovett, and refused to be troubled by minutiae. By 1948, with frailties building up, his participation was further curtailed. secondnameplaceholder said, "The fact of the matter is that Lovett bears the principal burden as I get away whenever possible."[76]
On June 5, 1947 in a speech[77] at Harvard University, he outlined the American proposal. The European Recovery Program, as it was formally known, became known as the secondnameplaceholder Plan. Clark Clifford had suggested to Truman that the plan be called the Truman Plan, but Truman immediately dismissed that idea and insisted that it be called the secondnameplaceholder Plan.[78][79] The secondnameplaceholder Plan would help Europe rebuild and modernize its economy along American lines, and open up new opportunities for international trade. Stalin ordered his satellites in Eastern Europe not to participate. secondnameplaceholder was again named "Man of the Year" by Time in January 1948.[80]Truman repeatedly rejected secondnameplaceholder's advice on Middle Eastern policy.[81] As Secretary of State, secondnameplaceholder strongly opposed recognizing the newly formed state of Israel. secondnameplaceholder felt that if the state of Israel was declared a war would break out in the Middle East (which it did in 1948 one day after Israel declared independence). secondnameplaceholder saw recognizing the Jewish state as a political move to gain Jewish support in the upcoming election, in which Truman was expected to lose to Dewey. He told President Truman in May 1948, "If you (recognize the state of Israel) and if I were to vote in the election, I would vote against you."[82][83][84]  However, secondnameplaceholder refused to vote in any election as a matter of principle.[85][86]During his tenure as Secretary of State, secondnameplaceholder also urged Truman to immediately call for The Netherlands to stop their invasion of Indonesia, a former Dutch colony which had declared independence in 1945. The Netherlands ignored the Truman administration's initial entreaties. As a result, the secondnameplaceholder Plan program for The Netherlands economic recovery was put on hold and the Truman administration threatened to cut all economic aid. The Netherlands finally agreed to withdraw and transferred sovereignty following the Dutch–Indonesian Round Table Conference in 1949.[87]secondnameplaceholder resigned as Secretary of State because of ill health on January 7, 1949. He was severely exhausted throughout his tenure in the position. Dean Acheson in late 1947 said he was underperforming  like "a four-engine bomber going only on one engine."[88] Truman named him to the largely honorific positions of chairman of the American Battle Monuments Commission and president of the American National Red Cross.[89] He received the 1953 Nobel Peace Prize for his post-war work, despite the criticism that he was a warrior not a pacifist.[90]
<h2>Secretary of Defense</h2>
When the early months of the Korean War showed how poorly prepared the Defense Department was, President Truman fired Secretary Louis A. Johnson and named secondnameplaceholder as Secretary of Defense in September 1950.[4]  The appointment required a congressional waiver because the National Security Act of 1947 prohibited a uniformed military officer from serving in the post.  This prohibition included secondnameplaceholder since individuals promoted to General of the Army are not technically retired, but remain officially on active duty even after their active service has concluded.[91] secondnameplaceholder was the first person to be granted such a waiver; in 2017, Jim Mattis became the second and in January 2021, General Lloyd Austin became the third.[92] secondnameplaceholder's main role as Secretary of Defense was to restore confidence and morale to the Defense Department while rebuilding the armed forces following their post-World War II demobilization.secondnameplaceholder worked to provide more manpower to meet the demands of both the Korean War and the Cold War in Europe. To implement his priorities secondnameplaceholder brought in a new leadership team, including Robert A. Lovett as his deputy and Anna M. Rosenberg, former head of the War Manpower Commission, as assistant secretary of defense for manpower. He also worked to rebuild the relationship between the Defense and State Departments, as well as the relationship between the Secretary of Defense and the Joint Chiefs of Staff.secondnameplaceholder participated in the post-Inchon landing discussion that led to authorizing Douglas MacArthur to conduct operations in North Korea.  A secret "eyes only" signal from secondnameplaceholder to MacArthur on September 29, 1950 declared the Truman administration's commitment: "We want you to feel unhampered strategically and tactically to proceed north of the 38th Parallel".[93] At the same time, secondnameplaceholder advised against public pronouncements which might lead to United Nations votes undermining or countermanding the initial mandate to restore the border between North and South Korea. secondnameplaceholder and the Joint Chiefs of Staff were generally supportive of MacArthur because they were of the view that field commanders should be able to exercise their best judgment in accomplishing the intent of their superiors.Following Chinese military intervention in Korea during late November, secondnameplaceholder and the Joint Chiefs of Staff sought ways to aid MacArthur while avoiding all-out war with China. In the debate over what to do about China's increased involvement, secondnameplaceholder opposed a cease–fire on the grounds that it would make the U.S. look weak in China's eyes, leading to demands for future concessions.[94] In addition, secondnameplaceholder argued that the U.S. had a moral obligation to honor its commitment to South Korea. When British Prime Minister Clement Attlee suggested diplomatic overtures to China, secondnameplaceholder opposed, arguing that it was impossible to negotiate with the Communist government. In addition, secondnameplaceholder expressed concern that concessions to China would undermine confidence in the U.S. among its Asian allies, including Japan and the Philippines.  When some in Congress favored expanding the war in Korea and confronting China, secondnameplaceholder argued against a wider war in Korea, continuing instead to stress the importance of containing the Soviet Union during the Cold War battle for primacy in Europe.Increasingly concerned about public statements from MacArthur, commander of United Nations forces fighting in the Korean War, which contradicted President Truman's on prosecution of the war, on the morning of 6 April 1951, Truman held a meeting with secondnameplaceholder, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Omar Bradley, Secretary of State Dean Acheson and advisor W. Averell Harriman to discuss whether MacArthur should be removed from command.[95]Harriman was emphatically in favor of MacArthur's relief, but Bradley opposed it.[95] secondnameplaceholder asked for more time to consider the matter.[95] Acheson was in favor but did not disclose this, instead warning Truman that if he did it, MacArthur's relief would cause "the biggest fight of your administration."[96]:429 At another meeting the following day, secondnameplaceholder and Bradley continued to oppose MacArthur's relief.[95] On 8 April, the Joint Chiefs of Staff met with secondnameplaceholder, and each expressed the view that MacArthur's relief was desirable from a "military point of view," suggesting that "if MacArthur were not relieved, a large segment of our people would charge that civil authorities no longer controlled the military."[97]:179secondnameplaceholder, Bradley, Acheson and Harriman met with Truman again on 9 April.[95] Bradley informed the President of the views of the Joint Chiefs, and secondnameplaceholder added that he agreed with them.[95] Truman wrote in his diary that "it is of unanimous opinion of all that MacArthur be relieved. All four so advise."[98] (The Joint Chiefs would later insist that they had only "concurred" with the relief, not "recommended" it.)[99]On April 11, 1951, President Truman directed transmittal of an order to MacArthur, issued over Bradley's signature, relieving MacArthur of his assignment in Korea and directing him to turn over command to Matthew Ridgway.[24]:99 In line with secondnameplaceholder's view, and those of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, MacArthur's relief was looked upon by proponents as being necessary to reassert the tenet of civilian control of the military.[95]
<h2>Later life</h2>
In September 1951, after 49 years of continuous public service, secondnameplaceholder retired to his home, Dodona Manor, in Leesburg, Virginia.[100] Purchased by the secondnameplaceholders in 1941, Dodona had previously served as a quiet weekend retreat for the busy couple.[101] The home was restored beginning in the 1990s and the house are gardens are open to the public as a museum.[100]It was at Dodona Manor that secondnameplaceholder enjoyed his favorite food, roast leg of lamb, and his favorite beverage, an old fashioned.[102] Gardening was one of secondnameplaceholder's favorite pastimes, and in retirement he grew vegetables throughout the year, including tomatoes and pumpkins, while Katherine secondnameplaceholder enjoyed tending to her rose garden.[101] In a 1942 letter to David Burpee, president of the W. Atlee Burpee & Company, secondnameplaceholder wrote, "The business of seeds and flowers tantalizes me because I have been an amateur gardener, both flower and vegetable, since a boy of ten. There is nothing I would so much prefer to do this spring as to turn my mind to the wholesome business of gardening rather than the terrible problems and tragedies of war."[103]Katherine's love of roses was well known, leading inventor Eugene S. Boerner to create the Katherine Tupper secondnameplaceholder Rose, a pink hybrid tea rose.[104] It was patented by Jackson and Perkins in 1943.[104]Throughout his retirement, secondnameplaceholder served as chairman of the American Battle Monuments Commission.[105] He oversaw the construction of fourteen cemeteries in eight countries following World War II to memorialize those killed or missing in battle.[106] In the early 1950s, secondnameplaceholder argued for the speedy construction and funding of cemeteries despite budget and staff cuts for the Korean War. secondnameplaceholder wrote to General Joseph McNarney in March 1951 saying, "I am naturally hesitant to become personally involved in individual personnel problems, but in this case, am deeply concerned about the overall moral factor if our foreign national cemeteries are not adequately maintained...."[106] secondnameplaceholder's efforts to secure building and maintenance staff for the cemeteries were successful, doubling the number of military officers assigned to the work.[106] On September 13, 1952, secondnameplaceholder attended the dedication ceremony of Suresnes American Cemetery in France.[106][107]After retiring, secondnameplaceholder largely withdrew from public life.[108] A notable exception was in June 1953, when he accepted President Eisenhower's appointment to head the American delegation to the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II.[109] The delegation included Earl Warren and Omar Bradley, and according to Bradley, as secondnameplaceholder walked up the Westminster Abbey aisle to take his seat before the ceremony, the audience rose to its feet as a gesture of respect.[108] secondnameplaceholder looked behind him to see who the arriving dignitary was, then realized the audience had stood for him.[108] secondnameplaceholder was also invited to the post-ceremony banquet at Buckingham Palace, and was the only non-royal seated at Queen Elizabeth's table.[108]
<h2>Family life</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was the youngest of three siblings.[110] His older brother Stuart Bradford secondnameplaceholder (1875–1956) was a graduate of the Virginia Military Institute, and became a manager and executive in several metal production corporations, including the American Manganese Manufacturing Company.[111][112][113] He later worked as a metallurgist and consulting engineer specializing in the production and operation of blast furnaces, coke ovens, and foundries.[114] firstnameplaceholder and Stuart secondnameplaceholder were long estranged because firstnameplaceholder married Lily Coles, who a few years before had rejected Stuart's proposal.[111] When Stuart found out firstnameplaceholder was engaged to Lily, Stuart made unkind remarks about her, and firstnameplaceholder "cut him off my list."[111]  secondnameplaceholder's sister, Marie Louise (1876–1962) was the wife of Dr. John Johnson Singer, an Army physician who died in 1934.[115]On February 11, 1902, secondnameplaceholder married Elizabeth Carter "Lily" Coles at her mother's home in Lexington, Virginia.[22] secondnameplaceholder met Lily after listening to her play the piano across the street from VMI.[116] secondnameplaceholder, being immediately smitten, would "run the block," or leave barracks after hours, to be with her.[116] After traveling abroad to Japan, Korea, and China with secondnameplaceholder, Lily returned to the U.S. to have a goiter removed. She died on September 15, 1927 after thyroid surgery that strained her weak heart.[117] They did not have children.[118]On October 15, 1930, secondnameplaceholder married Katherine Boyce Tupper (October 8, 1882 – December 18, 1978);[119][120] They had no children, but she was the mother of three children with Baltimore lawyer Clifton Stevenson Brown.[121] He had been murdered by a disgruntled client in 1928.[122][123] The second Mrs. secondnameplaceholder was a graduate of the American Academy of Dramatic Arts; she later studied at the Comédie-Française, and toured with Frank Benson's English Shakespearean Company.[124] She authored a memoir in 1946, Together: Annals of an Army Wife.[125]One of secondnameplaceholder's stepsons, Allen Tupper Brown, was an Army lieutenant who was killed in Italy on May 29, 1944.[126] Another stepson was Major Clifton Stevenson Brown Jr. (1914–1952).[127] Stepdaughter Molly Brown Winn, the mother of actress Kitty Winn, was married to Colonel James Julius Winn, who had been an aide to secondnameplaceholder.[128][121] Molly Winn was active in preserving secondnameplaceholder's legacy, including preserving Dodona Manor and publishing secondnameplaceholder's World War I memoirs.[128]
<h2>Death and burial</h2>
After a series of strokes, secondnameplaceholder died at Walter Reed Hospital in Washington, D.C. on October 16, 1959.[129] Although he was entitled to official proceedings, secondnameplaceholder preferred simplicity, so he received a special military funeral that dispensed with many of the usual activities.[130] The ceremonies included lying in state at Washington National Cathedral for 24 hours, guarded by representatives from each U.S. armed service and a VMI cadet.[130]In 1956, secondnameplaceholder detailed his instructions, in writing, to his aide, Colonel C. J. firstnameplaceholder:President Eisenhower ordered flags flown at half-mast, and was among the 200 guests invited for the funeral service held at Fort Myer.[130] Other dignitaries included former President Truman, Secretary of State Christian A. Herter, former Secretary of State Dean Acheson, former Governor W. Averell Harriman and Generals Omar N. Bradley, Alfred M. Gruenther, and Matthew B. Ridgway.[130] His parish priest, Franklin Moss Jr., from St. James Episcopal Church in Leesburg conducted the chapel and graveside services, assisted by former chief chaplain and National Cathedral Canon the Reverend Luther Miller.[130] In accordance with secondnameplaceholder's wishes, there was no eulogy.[130] Following the burial service, an artillery battery fired a 19-gun salute and a bugler played taps. The flag that draped secondnameplaceholder's casket was folded and given to Mrs. secondnameplaceholder by a VMI cadet.[130]secondnameplaceholder was buried at Arlington National Cemetery, Section 7, Grave 8198, beside his first wife and her mother, Elizabeth Pendleton Coles (1849–1929).[129][132] His second wife was also buried with him after she died on December 18, 1978.[133] On its reverse side, the marble headstone lists General secondnameplaceholder's positions held: "Chief of Staff U.S. Army, Secretary of State, President of American Red Cross, Secretary of Defense." The five-star rank adorns both sides of the stone.
<h2>Reputation and legacy</h2>
As William Taylor and other historians have recently emphasized, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was the best-known and most active--and most selfless--American leader in the early Cold War.  He is best known for giving his name and prestige to the secondnameplaceholder Plan to rebuild the European economy.  However, he suffered several defeats--he failed in the year-long effort to resolve the Chinese Civil War; he was defeated in his proposal to impose universal military service on all American men; and he was overruled by President Truman when he opposed the recognition of Israel. Historians agree that Truman depended heavily upon secondnameplaceholder’s prestige at a time of intensely bitter partisanship. Wilson Miscamble points to secondnameplaceholder’s delayed recognition of the threat posed by the Soviet Union – not until April 1947 did he realize the dangers. Miscamble concludes that recent studies show that secondnameplaceholder was:secondnameplaceholder's reputation for excellence as a military organizer and planner was recognized early in his career, and became known throughout the Army.  In a performance appraisal prepared while secondnameplaceholder was a lieutenant in the Philippines, his superior, Captain E. J. Williams responded to the routine question of whether he would want the evaluated officer to serve under his command again by writing of secondnameplaceholder "Should the exigencies of active service place him in exalted command I would be glad to serve under him." (Emphasis added.)[135]In 1913, Lieutenant Colonel Johnson Hagood completed a written evaluation of secondnameplaceholder's performance in which he called secondnameplaceholder a military genius. Responding to the question of whether he would want his subordinate secondnameplaceholder to serve under him again, Hagood wrote "Yes, but I would prefer to serve under his command." (Emphasis added.)[136] Hagood went on to recommend secondnameplaceholder's immediate promotion to brigadier general, despite the fact that there were more than 1,800 officers, including Hagood, who were senior to him.[137]After the surrender of the Nazi German government in May 1945, Henry L. Stimson, the Secretary of War, paid tribute to secondnameplaceholder in front of a gathering of members of the Army staff, concluding with: "I have seen a great many soldiers in my lifetime and you, Sir, are the finest soldier I have ever known."[138]Historians credit the high regard others had for secondnameplaceholder's personal integrity as another reason for his positive legacy.[139] In addition to his willingness to confront Pershing over Pershing's berating of the 1st Division chief of staff during World War I, secondnameplaceholder cited other instances where he provided persistent advice that kept Pershing from creating needless controversy.[139] In one, secondnameplaceholder recalled a time when Pershing and Harbord intended to change a War Department policy implemented by Peyton March, the chief of staff of the Army and Pershing's nominal superior, with whom Pershing had a long-running feud.[139] secondnameplaceholder counseled against it several times, and Pershing angrily indicated that Harbord and he intended to submit their proposal despite secondnameplaceholder's advice.[139] Rather than submit, secondnameplaceholder replied that Pershing was letting his personal feud with March cloud his judgment and that Harbord, who also disliked March, was doing the same.[139] Instead of continuing to "pull rank," Pershing yielded to secondnameplaceholder's judgment and said "Well, have it your own way."[139]In another incident that highlighted secondnameplaceholder's reputation for integrity, when President Franklin Roosevelt, a former Assistant Secretary of the Navy, favored the Navy during World War II planning, secondnameplaceholder suggested that Roosevelt stop referring to the Navy as "us" and the Army as "them."[140] Roosevelt laughed, but secondnameplaceholder's humorous protest had made its point.[140]In addition to his military success, secondnameplaceholder is primarily remembered as the driving force behind the secondnameplaceholder Plan, which provided billions of dollars in aid to post war Europe to restart the economies of the destroyed countries. In recent years, the cooperation required between former European adversaries as part of the secondnameplaceholder Plan has been recognized as one of the earliest factors that led to formation of the European Coal and Steel Community, and eventually the European Union.[141]In a television interview after leaving office, Truman was asked which American he thought had made the greatest contribution of the preceding thirty years. Without hesitation, Truman picked secondnameplaceholder, adding "I don't think in this age in which I have lived, that there has been a man who has been a greater administrator; a man with a knowledge of military affairs equal to General secondnameplaceholder."[142]Orson Welles said in a 1970 interview with Dick Cavett that "secondnameplaceholder is the greatest man I ever met... I think he was the greatest human being who was also a great man... He was a tremendous gentleman, an old fashioned institution which isn't with us anymore."[143] The story Welles related to Cavett to illustrate his point was about a time he saw secondnameplaceholder take the time to speak with a young American soldier who had accidentally entered the same room.[143]Two non-profit organizations, the firstnameplaceholder C. secondnameplaceholder Foundation and the firstnameplaceholder C. secondnameplaceholder International Center, actively propagate General secondnameplaceholder's legacy. The secondnameplaceholder Foundation oversees secondnameplaceholder's official papers and over two million other documents relating to the 20th century. The International Center preserves secondnameplaceholder's home, Dodona Manor, as a museum and hosts educational programs focusing on secondnameplaceholder's life, leadership, and role in American history.[42]Numerous streets are named for General secondnameplaceholder, including firstnameplaceholder-secondnameplaceholder-Straße in Wiesbaden, Germany and firstnameplaceholder-C.-secondnameplaceholder-Ring in Oberursel, Germany.[144][145]On April 30, 1998, the firstnameplaceholder C. secondnameplaceholder European Center for Security Studies unveiled the first public statue of General secondnameplaceholder in Europe in Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany.[146] The slightly larger-than-life statue was sponsored by the secondnameplaceholder Center, the Friends of the secondnameplaceholder Center and the City of Garmisch-Partenkirchen. It shows secondnameplaceholder in uniform walking across a bronze bridge, facing east, to greet new friends and allies and was designed by artist Christiane Horn of Wartenberg, Bavaria. Vernon A. Walters, former U.S. ambassador to Germany, was a keynote speaker during the dedication ceremony.[146]
<h2>Fictional portrayals</h2>
secondnameplaceholder has been played in film and television by:
<h2>Dates of rank</h2>
secondnameplaceholder's dates of rank were:[10][160]Note – secondnameplaceholder relinquished his active duty status when he became secretary of state in January 1947. He was returned to active duty upon leaving office in January 1949.[161]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder Bowles Pearson PC OM CC OBE (23 April 1897 – 27 December 1972) was a Canadian scholar, statesman, soldier, and diplomat, who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1957 for organizing the United Nations Emergency Force to resolve the Suez Canal Crisis. He was the 14th prime minister of Canada from 1963 to 1968, as the head of two back-to-back Liberal minority governments following elections in 1963 and 1965.During Pearson's time as prime minister, his Liberal minority governments introduced universal health care, the Canada Student Loan Program, the Canada Pension Plan, the Order of Canada, and the Maple Leaf flag. His Liberal government also unified Canada's armed forces.[1] Pearson convened the Royal Commission on Bilingualism and Biculturalism, and he kept Canada out of the Vietnam War. In 1967, his government passed Bill C-168, which de facto abolished capital punishment in Canada by restricting it to a few capital offences for which it was never used, and which themselves were abolished in 1976. With these accomplishments, together with his groundbreaking work at the United Nations and in international diplomacy, which included his role in ending the Suez Crisis, Pearson is generally considered among the most influential Canadians of the 20th century and is ranked among the greatest Canadian prime ministers.[2][3]
<h2>Early life, family, and education</h2>
Pearson was born in Newtonbrook in the township of York, Ontario (now a part of Toronto), the son of Annie Sarah (née Bowles) and Edwin Arthur Pearson, a Methodist (later United Church of Canada) minister. He was the brother of Vaughan Whitier Pearson and Marmaduke Pearson.[4]
firstnameplaceholder Pearson's father moved the young family north of Toronto to Aurora, Ontario, where he was the minister at Aurora Methodist Church on Yonge Street. firstnameplaceholder grew up in Aurora and attended the public school on Church Street. The family lived in the Methodist manse at the corner of Spruce and Catherine Streets. The home still exists but is in private hands. Pearson was a member of the Aurora Rugby team.Pearson graduated from Hamilton Collegiate Institute in Hamilton, Ontario, in 1913 at the age of 16. Later that same year, after spending three months at his uncle's emu farm in Australia,[5] he entered Victoria College at the University of Toronto,[4] where he lived in residence in Gate House and shared a room with his brother Duke. He was later elected to the Pi Gamma Mu social sciences honour society's chapter at the University of Toronto for his outstanding scholastic performance in history and psychology. Just as Norman Jewison, E. J. Pratt, Northrop Frye and his student Margaret Atwood would, Pearson participated in the sophomore theatrical tradition of The Bob Comedy Revue.[6] After Victoria College, Pearson won a scholarship to study at St John's College, Oxford, from 1921 to 1923.At the University of Toronto, Pearson became a noted athlete, excelling in rugby union and also playing basketball. He later also played for the Oxford University Ice Hockey Club while on a scholarship at the University of Oxford, a team that won the first Spengler Cup in 1923. Pearson also excelled in baseball and lacrosse as a youth. His baseball talents as an infielder were strong enough for a summer of semi-pro play with the Guelph Maple Leafs of the Ontario Intercounty Baseball League. Pearson toured North America with a combined Oxford and Cambridge Universities lacrosse team in 1923. After he joined the University of Toronto History Department as an instructor, he helped to coach the U of T's football and hockey teams. He played golf and tennis to high standards as an adult.[7]
<h2>First World War</h2>
During World War I, Pearson volunteered for service as a medical orderly with the University of Toronto Hospital Unit. In 1915, he entered overseas service with the Canadian Army Medical Corps as a stretcher-bearer with the rank of private, and was subsequently promoted to corporal. During this period of service, he spent nearly two years in Southern Europe, being shipped to Egypt and thereafter served on the Salonika Front. He also served alongside the Serbian Army as a medical orderly.[8] On 2 August 1917, Pearson was commissioned a temporary lieutenant.[9] He transferred to the Royal Flying Corps that year, since the Royal Canadian Air Force did not exist at that time, where he served as a flying officer until being sent home with injuries from two accidents. Pearson learned to fly at an air training school in Hendon, England. He survived an airplane crash during his first flight.[10][11][12]In 1918, Pearson was hit by a bus in London during a citywide blackout and he was sent home to recuperate, but then he was discharged from the service. It was as a pilot that he received the nickname of "Mike", given to him by a flight instructor who felt that "firstnameplaceholder" was too mild a name for an airman: "That’s a sissy’s name. You’re Mike," the instructor said.[13] Thereafter, Pearson would use the name "firstnameplaceholder" on official documents and in public life, but was always addressed as "Mike" by friends and family.[14]
<h2>Immediate post-war years</h2>
After the war, he returned to school, receiving his Bachelor of Arts degree from the University of Toronto in 1919. He was able to complete his degree after one more term, under a ruling in force at the time, since he had served in the military during the war. He then spent a year working in Hamilton, Ontario and Chicago, in the meat-packing industry, which he did not enjoy.Upon receiving a scholarship from the Massey Foundation, he studied for two years at St John's College at the University of Oxford, where he received a B.A. degree with Second-Class honours in modern history in 1923, and the M.A. in 1925. After Oxford, he returned to Canada and taught history at the University of Toronto.
<h2>Marriage, family</h2>
In 1925, he married Maryon Moody, from Winnipeg, who had been one of his students at the University of Toronto. Together, they had one son, Geoffrey, and one daughter, Patricia.[7] Although Maryon was initially a highly critical woman with an occasionally short temper during the first two decades of marriage, she supported her husband in all his political endeavors.[15]
<h2>Diplomat, public servant</h2>
In 1927, after scoring the top marks on the Canadian foreign service entry exam, he then embarked on a career in the Department of External Affairs.[7] Prime Minister R. B. Bennett was a noted talent spotter. He took note of, and encouraged, the young firstnameplaceholder Pearson in the early 1930s, and appointed Pearson to significant roles on two major government inquiries: the 1931 Royal Commission on Grain Futures, and the 1934 Royal Commission on Price Spreads. Bennett saw that Pearson was recognized with an OBE after he shone in that work, arranged a bonus of $1,800, and invited him to a London conference. Pearson was assigned to the High Commission of Canada to the United Kingdom in 1935, and he served there during World War II from 1939 through 1942 as the second-in-command at Canada House, where he coordinated military supply and refugee problems, serving under High Commissioner Vincent Massey.[7] In his book (published as "Mike: The Memoirs of the Rt. Hon. firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, Volume One: 1897–1948"), Pearson reveals that during 1940 he was hired by Sir William Stephenson—the enigmatic WWII spymaster known as "Intrepid"—to serve as a "King's Messenger" or courier conveying secret documents to Europe. (Ref. A Man Called Intrepid—The Secret War, by William Stevenson (1976).Pearson returned to Ottawa for a few months, where he was an assistant under secretary from 1941 through 1942.[16] In June 1942 he was posted to the Canadian Embassy in Washington, D.C., as a ministerial counsellor.[16] He served as second-in-command for nearly two years. Promoted minister plenipotentiary in 1944, he became the second Canadian Ambassador to the United States on 1 January 1945. He remained in this position through September 1946.[7][16]Pearson had an important part in founding both the United Nations and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.[17]Pearson nearly became the first Secretary-General of the United Nations in 1946, but he was vetoed by the Soviet Union.[7] He was also the leading candidate for Secretary-General in the 1953 selection, when the British conducted a vigorous campaign on his behalf. He placed first with 10 out of 11 votes in the Security Council, but the lone negative vote was another Soviet veto.[18][19] The Security Council instead settled on Dag Hammarskjöld of Sweden; all UN Secretaries-General would come from neutral countries for the rest of the Cold War.The Canadian Prime Minister, Mackenzie King, tried to recruit Pearson into his government as the war wound down. Pearson felt honoured by King's approach, but he resisted at the time, due to his personal dislike of King's poor personal style and political methods.[20] Pearson did not make the move into politics until a few years later, after King had announced his retirement as the Prime Minister of Canada.
<h2>Early political career</h2>
In 1948, before his retirement, Prime Minister King appointed Pearson Secretary of State for External Affairs (foreign minister) in the Liberal government. Shortly afterward, Pearson won a seat in the House of Commons, for the federal riding of Algoma East in Northern Ontario.[21] Pearson then served as Secretary of State for External Affairs for Prime Minister Louis St. Laurent, until the defeat of the St. Laurent government in 1957.
<h2>Nobel Peace Prize</h2>
In 1957, for his role in resolving the Suez Crisis through the United Nations, Pearson was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.[22] The selection committee argued that Pearson had "saved the world", but critics accused him of betraying the motherland and Canada's ties with the UK. Pearson and UN Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjöld are considered the fathers of the modern concept of peacekeeping. Together, they were able to organize the United Nations Emergency Force by way of a five-day fly-around in early November 1956. His Nobel medal was on permanent display in the front lobby of the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Building, the headquarters of Global Affairs Canada in Ottawa. Until, in 2017, the medal was loaned to the Canadian Museum of History, to be displayed in the 'Canadian History Hall'.[23]
<h2>Party leadership</h2>
St. Laurent was defeated by the Progressive Conservatives under John Diefenbaker in the election of 1957. After just a few months as Leader of the Opposition, St. Laurent retired, and he endorsed Pearson as his successor. Pearson was elected leader of the Liberal Party at its leadership convention of 1958, defeating his chief rival, former cabinet minister Paul Martin, Sr.At his first parliamentary session as Opposition Leader, Pearson asked Diefenbaker to give power back to the Liberals without an election, because of a recent economic downturn. This strategy backfired when Diefenbaker showed a classified Liberal document saying that the economy would face a downturn in that year. This contrasted heavily with the Liberals' campaign promises of 1957.Consequently, Pearson's party was routed in the federal election of 1958. The Liberals lost more than half their seats, while Diefenbaker's Conservatives won the largest majority ever seen in Canada to that point (208 of 265 seats). Furthermore, the election cost the Liberals their stronghold in Quebec. This province had voted largely Liberal in federal elections since the Conscription Crisis of 1917, but Quebec had no favourite son leader, as it had had since 1948.Pearson convened a significant "Thinkers' Conference" at Kingston, Ontario in 1960. This event developed many of the ideas later implemented when he became the Prime Minister.[24]In the federal election of 1962, the Liberals, led by Pearson, and the surprise election of 30 Social Credit MP's, deprived the Tories of their majority. As a consequence, Diefenbaker now had to preside over a minority government.Not long after the election, Pearson capitalized on the Conservatives' indecision on accepting American nuclear warheads on Canadian BOMARC missiles. Defence Minister Douglas Harkness resigned from Cabinet on 4 February 1963, because of Diefenbaker's opposition to accepting the warheads. On the next day, the government lost two nonconfidence motions on the issue, forcing a national election. In that election, the Liberals took 129 seats to the Tories' 95. Despite winning 41 percent of the vote, the Liberals came up five seats short of a majority largely because of winning just three seats on the Prairies. With the support of six Social Credit MPs from Quebec,[25] Pearson was able to guarantee stable government to the Governor-General, and Diefenbaker resigned, allowing Pearson to form a minority government. He was sworn in as the Prime Minister on 22 April 1963. Even though the support the Social Credit MPs was soon withdrawn, Pearson was able to maintain government with the support of the New Democratic Party.
<h2>Prime Minister (1963–1968)</h2>
Pearson campaigned during the election promising "60 Days of Decision" and supported the Bomarc surface-to-air missile program. Pearson never had a majority in the House of Commons, but he brought in many of Canada's major updated social programs, including universal health care, the Canada Pension Plan, and Canada Student Loans, and he instituted a new national flag, the Maple Leaf flag. He also instituted the 40-hour work week, two weeks vacation time, and a new minimum wage.On 15 January 1964, Pearson became the first Canadian Prime Minister to make an official state visit to France.[26]Pearson signed the Canada–United States Automotive Agreement (or Auto Pact) in January 1965, and unemployment fell to its lowest rate in over a decade.[27] While in office, Pearson declined U.S. requests to send Canadian combat troops into the Vietnam War. Pearson spoke at Temple University in Philadelphia on 2 April 1965, while visiting the United States and reportedly voiced his support for a pause in the American bombing of North Vietnam, so that a diplomatic solution to the crisis may unfold. To President Lyndon B. Johnson, this criticism of American foreign policy on American soil was an intolerable sin. Before Pearson had finished his speech, he was summoned to Camp David, Maryland, to meet with Johnson the next day. Johnson, who was notorious for his personal touch in politics, reportedly grabbed Pearson by the lapels and shouted, "Don't you come into my living room and piss on my rug."[28][29] Text of his Philadelphia speech, however, showed that Pearson in fact supported President Johnson's policy in Vietnam, even stating "The government and great majority of people of my country have supported wholeheartedly the US peacekeeping and peacemaking policies in Vietnam."[30][31][32]Pearson later recounted that the meeting was acrimonious, but insisted the two parted cordially. After this incident, L.B.J. and Pearson did have further contacts, including two more meetings together, both times in Canada[33] as the United States relied on Canada's raw materials and resources to fuel and sustain its efforts in the Vietnam War.[34]Pearson also started a number of Royal Commissions, including the Royal Commission on the Status of Women and the Royal Commission on Bilingualism and Biculturalism. These suggested changes that helped create legal equality for women, and brought official bilingualism into being. After Pearson's term in office, French was made an official language, and the Canadian government provided services in both English and French. Pearson himself had hoped that he would be the last unilingual Prime Minister of Canada and fluency in both English and French became an unofficial requirement for candidates for Prime Minister after Pearson left office.Pearson's government endured significant controversy in Canada's military services throughout the mid-1960s, following the tabling of the White Paper on Defence in March 1964. This document laid out a plan to merge the Royal Canadian Navy, the Royal Canadian Air Force, and the Canadian Army to form a single service called the Canadian Forces. Military unification took effect on 1 February 1968, when The Canadian Forces Reorganization Act received Royal Assent.Pearson has been credited with instituting the world's first race-free immigration system.[35] Credit for who created the policy, however, is disputed, and likely should be shared with John Diefenbaker.[36] Diefenbaker's government in 1962 introduced a new race-free policy; however, under the 1962 policy, Americans were still given an advantage.[37] It was in 1967 that Pearson introduced a discrimination-free points-based system which encouraged immigration to Canada, a forerunner of the system still in place today.Pearson also oversaw Canada's centennial celebrations in 1967 before retiring. The Canadian news agency, The Canadian Press, named him "Newsmaker of the Year" that year, citing his leadership during the centennial celebrations, which brought the Centennial Flame to Parliament Hill.Also in 1967, the President of France, Charles de Gaulle, made a visit to Quebec. During that visit, de Gaulle was a staunch advocate of Quebec separatism, even going so far as to say that his procession in Montreal reminded him of his return to Paris after it was freed from the Nazis during the Second World War. President de Gaulle also gave his "Vive le Québec libre" speech during the visit. Given Canada's efforts in aiding France during both world wars, Pearson was enraged. He rebuked de Gaulle in a speech the following day, remarking that "Canadians do not need to be liberated" and made it clear that de Gaulle was no longer welcome in Canada.
<h2>Supreme Court appointments</h2>
Pearson chose the following jurists to be appointed as justices of the Supreme Court of Canada by the Governor General:
<h2>Retirement</h2>
After his 14 December 1967 announcement that he was retiring from politics, a leadership convention was held. Pearson's successor was Pierre Trudeau, whom Pearson had recruited and made justice minister in his cabinet. Two other cabinet ministers Pearson had recruited, John Turner and Jean Chrétien, served as prime ministers following Trudeau's retirement.From 1968 to 1969, Pearson served as chairman of the Commission on International Development (the Pearson Commission), which was sponsored by the World Bank. Immediately following his retirement, he lectured in history and political science at Carleton University while writing his memoirs. From 1970 to 1972, he was the first chairman of the Board of Governors of the International Development Research Centre. From 1969 until his death in 1972, he was chancellor of Carleton University in Ottawa.
<h2>Illness and death</h2>
In 1970, Pearson underwent a surgery to have his right eye removed to remove a tumor in that area.[38]Pearson had planned at the time to write a three-volume set of memoirs, and had published Volume One by 1972. He had finished but a few chapters of Volume Two when, in November 1972, it was reported that he was admitted to the hospital for further unspecified treatment, but the prognosis was poor. He tried to write at this juncture the story of his prime ministerial career, but his condition, which was already precarious, deteriorated rapidly by Christmas Eve.[39]On 27 December 1972, it was announced that the cancer had spread to the liver and Pearson had lapsed into a coma. He died at 11:40 pm ET on 27 December 1972 in his Ottawa home.[40]Pearson is buried at Maclaren Cemetery in Wakefield, Quebec[41] (just north of Gatineau), next to his close External Affairs colleagues H. H. Wrong and Norman Robertson.
<h2>Honours and awards</h2>
Pearson was appointed a Companion of the Order of Canada on 28 June 1968.  His citation reads:[43]firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder fonds at Library and Archives Canada
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder,  O.P. (born Georges Charles Clement Ghislain secondnameplaceholder; 10 February 1910 – 30 January 1969) was a Belgian Dominican friar whose work helping refugees in post-World War II Europe saw him receive the Nobel Peace Prize in 1958. secondnameplaceholder delivered his Nobel lecture, entitled Brotherly Love: Foundation of Peace, in December 1958.[1]
<h2>Early biography</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born in Dinant, Belgium. He was the eldest child of four born to Georges secondnameplaceholder, Sr., a civic official, and Berthe (Ravet) secondnameplaceholder.[2]At the outbreak of the First World War in 1914 secondnameplaceholder's family fled from Belgium to France in a boat to escape advancing German troops.  After the armistice of 1918 the family was able to return to Dinant, which had been reduced to ruins.[3]
<h2>Education</h2>
secondnameplaceholder studied Classics and Philosophy at the Collège de Bellevue and at the age of eighteen entered the Dominican priory of La Sarte in Huy. He took his final vows on 23 September 1932, adopting the name firstnameplaceholder, after the Order's founder.  He then studied theology and social science at the Pontifical International Institute Angelicum, the future Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, Angelicum in Rome, where he obtained his doctorate in theology in 1936 with a thesis entitled L’Apatheia ou insensibilité irréalisable et destructrice (Apatheia or unrealisable and destructive insensitivity).[4] He then returned to the Studium of La Sarte where he taught sociology.
<h2>Career</h2>
After completing his studies secondnameplaceholder returned to the priory at La Sarte, in Huy, Belgium where he dedicated himself to helping poor families live according to their dignity.  During the second world war, secondnameplaceholder served as chaplain to the Belgian resistance, actively participating in its activities, such as helping smuggle Allied pilots out of the country.  He received several medals for this service after the war.In 1949, he began studying issues relating to postwar refugees (Displaced Persons [DP]) and wrote a book about them, entitled Du Rhin au Danube avec 60,000 D. P.. He founded an organisation to help them.  The organisation established sponsorships for refugee families, and during the 1950s built a number of villages in Austria and Germany to help house many refugees.  Although a Dominican friar, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder always refused to mix his personal faith with his commitments on behalf of the disadvantaged, a decision that was not always understood by his religious superiors.After winning the Peace Prize, secondnameplaceholder also helped found a "Peace University" to raise global understanding. Later convinced that peace would not be achievable without the eradication of poverty, he founded "Islands of Peace", an NGO dedicated to the long term development of rural populations in developing countries. Projects were started in Bangladesh and India.secondnameplaceholder died at Louvain Roman Catholic Hospital on 30 January 1969 from complications following prostate surgery, at age 58.[5]More than 30 years after his death, the four organizations he founded are still active. In 2008 a program was established in honour of his work at the Las Casas Institute at Blackfriars Hall, University of Oxford.[6]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder John secondnameplaceholder, Baron secondnameplaceholder, PC (1 November 1889 – 8 October 1982), born firstnameplaceholder John Baker, was a British politician, diplomat, academic, amateur athlete, and renowned campaigner for disarmament.  He carried the British team flag and won a silver medal for the 1500m at the 1920 Summer Olympics in Antwerp, and received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1959.[1]secondnameplaceholder is the only person to have won an Olympic medal and received a Nobel Prize.[2] He was a Labour member of parliament from 1929 to 1931 and from 1936 to 1970, serving in several ministerial offices and the cabinet. He became a life peer in 1977.
<h2>Early life and athletic career</h2>
Baker was born in Brondesbury Park, London,[3] the sixth of seven children of the Canadian-born Quaker, Joseph Allen Baker and the Scottish-born Elizabeth Balmer Moscrip. His father had moved to England in 1876 to establish a manufacturing business and served as a Progressive member of the London County Council from 1895 to 1906 and as a Liberal member of the House of Commons for East Finsbury from 1905 to 1918.Baker was educated at Ackworth School, Bootham School, and then in the US at the Quaker-associated Haverford College in Pennsylvania. He studied at King's College, Cambridge, from 1908 to 1912. As well as being an excellent student, obtaining a second in Part I history and a first in Part II economics, he was President of the Cambridge Union Society in 1912 and President of the Cambridge University Athletic Club from 1910 to 1912.[3]He was a competitor in the Olympic Games as a middle-distance runner, both before and after the First World War, representing Great Britain in the 800 metres and 1500 metres at the 1912 Olympic Games in Stockholm.[4] He reached the final of the 1500 metres, won by his fellow countryman Arnold Jackson. At the 1920 Summer Olympics in Antwerp Baker was captain of the British track team and carried the team's flag. He won his first race in the 800 metres, but then concentrated on the 1500 metres, taking the silver medal behind his teammate Albert Hill.[5] He was captain again at the 1924 Summer Olympics in Paris, but did not compete.[3]Baker's early career was as an academic. In 1914 he was appointed as vice-principal of Ruskin College, Oxford, and in 1915 was elected a fellow at King's College, Cambridge.[3] During World War I, he organised and led the Friends' Ambulance Unit attached to the fighting front in France (1914–1915), and was then, as a conscientious objector from 1916, adjutant of the First British Ambulance Unit for Italy, in association with the British Red Cross (1915–1918), for which he received military medals from the UK, France and Italy.[5]
<h2>Political career</h2>
After World War I, secondnameplaceholder was closely involved in the formation of the League of Nations, serving as assistant to Lord Robert Cecil, then assistant to Sir Eric Drummond, the league's first secretary-general. He became the first Sir Ernest Cassel Professor of International Relations at the University of London from 1924 to 1929[6] and a lecturer at Yale University from 1933 to 1934. His political career with the Labour Party began in 1924 when he stood, unsuccessfully, for Parliament in the Conservative safe seat of Birmingham Handsworth. He was elected as the member for Coventry in 1929, and served as parliamentary private secretary to the Foreign Secretary Arthur Henderson.[7]secondnameplaceholder lost his seat in 1931, but remained Henderson's assistant while Henderson was president of the World Disarmament Conference in Geneva in 1932 to 1933. He stood for Parliament again in Coventry in 1935, unsuccessfully, but won the Derby by-election in July 1936 after the sitting Derby Member of Parliament J. H. Thomas resigned. When that constituency was split in 1950, he transferred to Derby South.secondnameplaceholder became a member of the Labour Party's National Executive Committee in 1937. On 21 June 1938, secondnameplaceholder, as M.P. for Derby, in the run up to World War II, spoke at the House of Commons against aerial bombing of German cities based on moral grounds. "The only way to prevent atrocities from the air is to abolish air warfare and national air forces altogether."[8]In the coalition government during the World War II he was a parliamentary secretary at the Ministry of War Transport from February 1942, and served as Minister of State for Foreign Affairs after Labour gained power following the 1945 general election, but had a poor relationship with the Foreign Secretary, Ernest Bevin. secondnameplaceholder moved to become Secretary of State for Air in October 1946, and then became Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations in 1947 and joined the cabinet.[9]secondnameplaceholder was the minister responsible for organising the 1948 Olympic Games in London. He moved to the Ministry of Fuel and Power in 1950. In the mid-1940s, secondnameplaceholder served on the British delegation to what became the United Nations, helping to draft its charter and other rules for operation as a British delegate. He served as Chairman of the Labour Party in 1946–47, but lost his place on the National Executive Committee in 1948, his place being taken by Michael Foot.[10] An opponent of left-wing Bevanite policies in the 1950s, and an advocate of multilateral nuclear disarmament, rather than a policy of unilateral disarmament, he received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1959. In 1979, with Fenner Brockway, he co-founded the World Disarmament Campaign, serving as co-Chair until he died,[11][12] and was an active supporter of disarmament into the 1980s.secondnameplaceholder stood down as the MP for Derby South at the 1970 general election, at which he was succeeded by Walter Johnson. His life peerage was announced in the 1977 Silver Jubilee and Birthday Honours[13] and he was raised to the peerage 22 July 1977, as Baron secondnameplaceholder, of the City of Derby,[14][15] having declined an appointment as a Companion of Honour in the 1965 New Year Honours. He was president of the International Council of Sport Science and Physical Education from 1960 to 1976.[3]
<h2>Personal life</h2>
In June 1915, firstnameplaceholder Baker married Irene Noel, a field hospital nurse in East Grinstead, subsequently adopting the hyphenated name secondnameplaceholder in 1921 by deed poll.[16] His wife was a friend of Virginia Woolf. Their only son, Francis secondnameplaceholder, also became a Labour MP and served together with his father in the Commons. Their marriage, however was not a success and secondnameplaceholder's mistress from 1936 was Megan Lloyd George, daughter of the former Liberal Party leader David Lloyd George, herself a Liberal and later Labour MP. The relationship ended when Irene died in 1956.Following secondnameplaceholder's death in Westminster, aged 92, he was buried alongside his wife in Heyshott, West Sussex.[3]
<h2>Works</h2>
By firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder with other authorsPrimary and Secondary Sources
(!!)Article(!/!)
Inkosi firstnameplaceholder John Luthuli (very often spelt secondnameplaceholder;[1] c. 1898 – 21 July 1967), also known by his Zulu name Mvumbi (English language: continuous rain),[2] was a South African teacher, activist, Nobel Peace Prize winner, and politician. In 1952, Luthuli was elected president of the African National Congress (ANC), at the time an umbrella organisation leading opposition to the white minority government in South Africa. Luthuli ended up serving until his accidental death. He was awarded the 1960 Nobel Peace Prize for his role in the non-violent struggle against apartheid. He was the first person of African heritage to be awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. Luthuli was a lay preacher of the United Congregational Church of Southern Africa (UCCSA) based at its Groutville Congregational Church in Stanger, KwaZulu-Natal, where Luthuli was laid to rest upon his death in 1967.[3]
<h2>Early life</h2>
firstnameplaceholder John Mvumbi Luthuli was born in Solusi Mission Station near Bulawayo, in Southern Rhodesia, which is modern-day Zimbabwe. While his date of birth remains unknown, he later calculated his year of birth to be 1898. His father, John Bunyan Luthuli, was the younger son of a tribal chief at Groutville in the Umvoti Mission Reserve near Stanger, Natal. He became a Christian missionary at the Seventh-Day Adventist Church and at the time of firstnameplaceholder's birth, was working as an interpreter among the Matabele of Rhodesia. His mother, Mtonya Gumede, spent part of her childhood in the household of Cetewayo kaMpande, the king of the Zulu Kingdom, but was mostly raised in Groutville. John Bunyan Luthuli, firstnameplaceholder's father, died when firstnameplaceholder was a young child.[a] Sometime between 1906 and 1908. firstnameplaceholder was the couple's third child. He had two other siblings, Alfred Nsusana (the eldest child), and Mpangwa (who died at birth).[4]
<h2>Schooling</h2>
The Luthuli family owned fifteen acres of land in Southern Rhodesia that his father, John, had previously bought. They remained in Southern Rhodesia until 1908 where they moved to the Vryheid district in Natal, South Africa. His older brother Alfred became an interpreter for a Seventh Day Adventist mission. Because there were no schools in Vryheid that firstnameplaceholder was allowed to attend, his mother sent him to Groutville, Natal where he lived in the household of his uncle, Martin Luthuli, who had succeeded his grandfather as the tribal chief. Martin was the first democratically elected chief, the translator and interpreter of the Zulu royal house, as well as the founder of the Natal Native Congress and the African Native National Congress, now named the African National Congress. Martin provided firstnameplaceholder with early knowledge of African politics which helped aid him in his career as a politician and activist.[5]Groutville was a small community of Christian peasant farmers and was attached to the mission station of the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions (ABM). The ABM was a Congregationalist that began their mission work in Southern Africa in the 1830s. Missionary Aldin Grout began his mission station in the village of Umvoti, after his death it would be renamed Groutville in his honor. His first converts to Christianity was firstnameplaceholder's grandparents, Ntaba ka Madunjini and Titisi Mthethwa. REFERENCES. 
In 1911, supported by his mother who paid firstnameplaceholder's school fees by selling vegetables from her garden and taking in laundry from white families in the nearby town of Stanger (now KwaDukuza). firstnameplaceholder entered the local Congregationalist mission school, Groutville Primary. Here he studied until standard four. Living with his uncle, he also imbibed tribal traditions and values.[6]In 1914, firstnameplaceholder was shifted to Ohlange Institute. It was a boarding school, run by Dr. John Dube, the founding President of the South African Native National Council and here he studied for two terms. On passing the year-end examination at Ohlange Institute, firstnameplaceholder was transferred to a Methodist institution at Edendale, near Pietermaritzburg to undergo a teachers' training course. firstnameplaceholder was one of the many pupils who briefly left the school to protest the disciplanary code that required the students to carry stones from the river. firstnameplaceholder then realized that this act of rebellion could have drastic consequences. Because they left Edendale, the boys were subject to pass laws and curfew laws and risked arrest by the South African Police. firstnameplaceholder was later readmitted to the institution despite the previous brush up, and he developed a love for teaching at Edendale. He graduated from there in 1917.[7]
<h2>Teaching</h2>
On completing a teaching course at Edendale, near Pietermaritzburg, Luthuli accepted the post of principal and only teacher at a primary school in rural Blaauwbosch, Newcastle, Natal. Here Luthuli was confirmed in the Congregational Church and became a lay preacher. In 1920 he received a government bursary to attend a higher teachers' training course at Adams College, and subsequently joined the training college staff, teaching alongside Z. K. Mathews, who was then head of the Adams College High School.[8]Luthuli was determined to bring education to the African population and headed the Teachers' College at Adams where he would train future teachers and travel by motorbike to teach at different institutions. With Z.K. Matthews he cofounded the African Teachers' Association, an organization that sought higher wages. As a teacher, he taught Zulu history, Zulu music, and Zulu literature. He cofounded the Zulu Cultural and Language Society to promote Zulu history and culture among the young Zulu population. The Zulu Cultural and Language Society also promoted Zulu as the language of use for primary education.[9]Passionate about music, Luthuli and his student, Reuben Caluza, founded the Adams College School of Music in 1935 and led choirs all throughout Natal. Luthuli would conduct the Sunday church choir and give sermons, and as leader of the Young Men’s Christian Association (YMCA), would interact with YMCA missioanry Max Yergan, who admired Luthuli for expanding the work of the YMCA.[9]
<h2>Tribal chief</h2>
In 1933 the tribal elders asked Luthuli to become chief of a Christian branch of the Zulu tribe to replace the unpopular Chief Josiah Mqwebu who had replaced Martin Luthuli in 1921. For two years he hesitated, Luthuli enjoyed teaching and the salary as a chief was only 20% of what he received as a teacher at Adams. Some of his peers also believed that Luthuli, one of the first African teachers at Adams would abandon his post that prepared young Africans for modern society to accept a position as a Chieftain that was seen as "traditional." Despite this, he accepted the call in December of 1935 and became a chieftain in the year of 1936.[10]As a chieftain, Luthuli would practice the philosophy of Ubuntu. Ubuntu recognized the humanity and interdependence of every person. Luthuli governed with democracy, wisdom, integrity, and empathy. Luthuli understood that the position of chief was to be responsive to the needs of the people. Luthuli was seen as a chief of and by, not above, his people. He would lead the dancing and singing at community festivals. One community member remembered Luthuli as a "man of the people [who] had a very strong influence over the community. He was a people’s chief."[11]Luthuli would make frequent visits as chief to the Zulu royal capital in Ulundi. Here, he would meet with other chiefs and prominent Zulu elders. Luthuli worked with his InDuna, childhood friend Robbins Guma, as well as a council of amakholwa (converted Christians) and amabhinca elders (traditionalists) on judicial matters. Luthuli included women, who were regarded as social and legal minors, in his democratic consultations. Luthuli also facilitated the economic advancement of women by disregarding the government prohibition of beer brewing and selling by operating unlicensed bars known as Shebeens.[11]He held this position until he was removed from his office by the Apartheid government in 1953. Their having done so notwithstanding, amongst his people he retained the use of the dignity "chief" as a pre-nominal style for the remainder of his life.
<h2>Segregation in South Africa</h2>
To counter the 1913 and 1936 Land Acts which led to Black dislocation and impoverishment, Chief Luthuli attempted to nurture his community. The Land Acts were part of the violence related to segregation in South Africa. Africans were stripped of their land and poverty was increasing within the African community due to many Black South Africans having to travel to urban areas further away to be able to work. This also separated families further. Luthuli noted the disparity that whites needed 375 acres per person to live comfortably, yet African families were only to get 6 acres total. The small amount of land that African families had would eventually lead to soil exhaustion, the land had a lack of adequate ground for grazing, and there would be little inheritable land for future African children[12]Luthuli was fervently against the land rehabilitation scheme of the government. This forced African farmers to sell their surplus cattle at a reduced cost to white farmers who had much more land where they could incorporate their newly acquired cattle and gain more wealth. Luthuli stated “ your solution is to take our cattle away today because you took our land yesterday.” He goes on to say that cattle are cherished possessions and a source of income for many Africans, and removing that source of income represents an economic act of violence against Africans.[12]In 1936, the government's sugar act attempted to keep sugar prices high by limiting the number of farmers who could produce it. This act disproportionately hurt African sugar-cane farmers who lived substantially lower than the poverty line. Unlike their white counterparts, African farmers held insufficient land as well as having no legal title. This means that they could not use their land as security for short-term loans to buy products such as machinery and fertilizer which led to the offsetting cost of planting, harvesting, and sending the sugar to the mill.[13]South African officials insisted that the cause of African poverty was due to the inefficient African agricultural techniques, not the inadequate land. Luthuli's status as chief positioned him to observe the fallacious claims of the government, the deepening poverty of the Groutville community, the negative effects of African disfranchisement, taxation without representation, land scarcity and economic insecurity.[14]Luthuli immediately revived the Groutville Bantu Cane Growers' Association. A group of nearly two-hundred small-scale cane growers that successfully lobbied the millers to advance money that would allow African farmers to meet production costs upfront. Luthuli also chaired the Natal and Zululand Bantu Cane Growers' Association, bringing nearly all African sugarcane producers into one union. His tour of America in 1948 enabled him to acquire a tractor that helped boost agricultural production by local farmers, some farmers increased their margins enough to send their children to school.[15]Jordan Ngubane, a South African intellectual who studied at Adams under Luthuli and later became his personal secretary and political ally, credited Luthuli with promoting economic development, increasing agricultural efficiency and sending young Africans to schools and universities.[15]
<h2>Pre-Apartheid activism</h2>
The Atlantic Charter was issued in August 1941 by American president Franklin D. Roosevelt and British prime minister Winston Churchill that laid out the American and British war goals during World War II and their postwar aspirations. Among other things, the Atlantic Charter declared the right of all people to self-determination and restoring self government. Despite the charter, Churchill and South African prime minister Jan Smuts claimed that self-determination had applied only to countries occupied by fascist powers, not to European colonial possessions and South Africa. Because of this, Luthuli and other Africans began to believe that supporting Smuts in the war against Germany represented nothing more than choosing between two white supremacist regimes. In 1943, the ANC published African Claims, demanding the right of African self-determination, a bill of rights, racial equality, universal suffrage and nonracial citizenship for blacks in South Africa.[16]In 1946, Luthuli assumed the council duty in the Native Representative Council (NRC), an advisory body to the government. Luthuli reiterated his demands made in African Claims and continued his longstanding complaints about inadequate African land, comments that enraged the white NRC chairman. With the support of fellow councilors, Luthuli protested the state's use of force to suppress a massive African mineworker's strike, as well as condemning "the reactionary character of the Union Native Policy," which exposed the South African government's post war continuation of a policy of fascism which is the exact opposite of the Atlantic Charter.[17]Luthuli claimed that the government was deaf to African groans of pain in response to oppressive segregationist measures. Luthuli would later say that the NRC was a "toy telephone" requiring him to "shout a little louder" to no one, and African councilors then adjourned in protest. The NRC never met after that point and the government dissolved it in 1952.[17]
<h2>Anti-Apartheid Activism</h2>
The unexpected victory of the National Party in May 1948 made Apartheid the official state policy until 1994. Founded in 1933 by Dutch Reformed Church minister and newspaper editor Daniel François Malan, the National Party was the party of the resurgent Afrikaner ethno-nationalism that sought cultural autonomy, and explicit political measures to ensure Afrikaner power and identity to counter the British political and economic dominance and African numerical superiority. Many pro-Nazi Afrikaners, including future apartheid prime ministers Johannes Strydom and John Vorster had opposed South African military and economic contributions to the Allied cause against Hitler's Germany, engaging in activities that caused their detention during the war. The close proximity of working-class Africans and Afrikaners renewed fears of racial mixing and prompted calls for policies that would ensure Afrikaner racial separation and preservation. Jan Smuts of the United Party who had previously trounced the Nationalists in the 1943 election, won the popular vote in 1948 but because of greater electoral weight given to rural districts, which voted heavily for the National Party, the National Party squeezed out an improbable victory.[18]In June 1948, Luthuli traveled to the U.S. for seven months, during which he addressed numerous churches, youth groups, civic groups, and others about the progress of the Natal American Board missions, African rural development, and racial reconciliation. This was not his first overseas trip. In 1938, Luthuli had traveled to Madras, India, as part of an interracial Christian delegation to an international missionary conference. Despite the fact that South African segregation traveled outside their borders due to white delegates traveling first class and the four African delegates traveling second class, Luthuli toured India and Ceylon (now Sri Lanka), met Indian, Japanese, Chinese and African Christian leaders, and returned "with wider sympathies and wider horizons."[19]Luthuli's tour of the United States took place during the 1948 presidential election when President Harry Truman put forth a mild but unprecedented civil rights agenda that sparked the "Dixiecrat" revolt of southern segregationists. Luthuli hoped that African Americans who unlike Black South Africans had constitutional rights, would ultimately triumph over Jim Crow practices and that the U.S. would be a positive model of multiracial democracy for his own country.[19]Luthuli toured the South on Jim Crow trains to visit the historically black universities of Howard, Atlanta, Tuskegee, and Virginia State. He remarked, "I have such a great desire to visit my people in the South that I would have been awfully disappointed to return to Africa without doing so." At Howard, Luthuli lectured students on African history, met African students, marveled at the library's giant collection on Africa, and was hosted by members of Washington's black community. During his lectures Luthuli would explain the enduring values of Zulu traditional society, Zulu religious concepts, and Zulus' respect for law and order. While at Virginia State and Tuskegee, Luthuli visited black farmers and discussed sustainable agricultural methods he also initiated conversations with rural parents and children about the quality of education.[20]In Virginia with his host, Dr. Samuel Gandy, a restaurant did not allow Luthuli and Gandy to eat on its premises. Upon learning that Luthuli was a South African, they declared Luthuli an "honorary white," telling him he could stay, but not Gandy. Both men left in disgust. Luthuli remarked that his tour of the south had a profound effect on him, and allowed him to "see South African issues more sharply, and in a different and larger perspective." Luthuli's national tour reminded him of the transnational presence of white supremacy: "those moments—a door closed in one’s face, a restaurant where a cup of coffee has been refused—that jolt the black man back to the realization that, almost everywhere he travels, race prejudice will not let him be at home in the world." Luthuli left America in February 1949 having felt the sting of American Jim Crow but also encouraged by African-American progress.[21]In Luthuli's view, the apartheid government and their white supporters had pirated the land, wealth, and government. He also believes the apartheid government claimed ownership of the African majority, virtually enslaving them through the apartheid laws. Africans were the "livestock which went with the estate, objects rather than subjects," nothing more than political footballs being passed around by the National Party and their white parliamentary rivals.Despite being recently hampered by a stroke, Luthuli was able to plan the Congress of the People, a gathering that brought thousands of members of all the racial and political congresses across South Africa together. Held in 1955 at Kliptown, on the now symbolic date of 26 June, and lasting for two days, a manifesto of the liberation struggle, known as the Freedom Charter, was unanimously approved. This document received enormous press coverage, and was the apex of the non-violent liberation movement thus far. The major theme of the Freedom Charter, was that South Africa belonged to all who lived in it. The exact opposite of what the apartheid regime believed. Speaking much later, Luthuli claimed that: "The African people do not want crumbs. They demand what is their rightful heritage in the land of their birth--Africa. Our demand is, and always will be-- 'back from tribalism; forward to a nonracial democracy." [22] Luthuli was not able to attend the Congress of the People due to a previous stroke, heart attack, and government prevention, but the recovering Luthuli sent a recorded speech to the audience in Kliptown in which he proclaimed the Freedom Charter as a Magna Carta that would lead to an actual South African parliament where everyone has a voice.[23]
<h2>Career in the ANC</h2>
Prior to Luthuli's involvement with the African National Congress (ANC) Luthuli also had served on the executive committee of the Christian Council of South Africa. Luthuli was one of its delegates to an International Missionary Conference held in Madras, India, in 1938.In 1944, Luthuli joined the African National Congress (ANC), partially out of respect for the recently deceased Natal ANC president John Dube. During the 1930s, the ANC was virtually dead, but ANC president Dr. Aldred Xuma had reinvigorated the party. During the December 1948 conference, the ANC Youth Leaguers such as A.P. Mda, Walter Sisulu, Nelson Mandela, and Oliver Tambo argued that the beginning of the apartheid regime forced the ANC to move beyond constitutional methods. They proposed a Program of Action that consisted of civil disobedience tactics, including strikes and boycotts. Before the December 1949 ANC annual conference, they challenged Xuma to move beyond the constitutional measures to fight apartheid, but he refused. Inspired by Kwame Nkrumah's anticolonial stance in the Gold Coast, the Youth Leaguers seized control of the ANC at the 1949 conference, as delegates voted to adopt the program of action. Delegates also voted the Youth League's candidate, Dr. James Moroka, who defeated Dr. Xuma. Sisulu became ANC secretary-general and Luthuli would lead the execution of the Program of Action in Natal.[24]After initial reservations about African-Indian collaboration after the January 1949 Durban riots, where some Africans were frustrated by the perceived arrogance and discrimination of Indians toward them and began to attack Indians, Luthuli participated in a joint-action campaign with the South African Indian Congresses. This included a one-day strike on May 1, 1950, where the South African police killed at least eighteen unarmed, nonviolent protesters, and a multiracial one-day stay at home on June 26, 1950, to protest the Group Areas Act and the Suppression of Communism Act.[25]After resigning from the Natal ANC shortly after the protests, ANC leaders in Transvaal and Natal, specifically the Youth League leaders M.B. Yengwa and Wilson Conco, and Jordan Ngubane, the editor of the African newspaper Inkundla ya Bantu, persuaded Luthuli to stand as Natal ANC president at the 1951 Natal ANC conference. Yengwa noted that the Natal ANC president, Allison Wessels George (A.W.G.) Champion, wasn't prepared to cooperate with the Indians, and that Africans had no alternative but to work with them because they shared a common enemy. On May 3, 1951, Luthuli became the Natal ANC president and defeated A.W.G. Champion in a contentious election.[26]Luthuli became a national figure during the 1952 Defiance Campaign, a multiracial mobilization to resist apartheid led by the ANC, the SAIC, and the Coloured Peoples Convention (CPC). Luthuli led protests against the Pass Laws, Group Areas Act, Separate Voters' Representation Act, Suppression of Communism Act, and the Bantu Authorities Act. The Defiance Campaign modeled themselves after the non-violent methods of Gandhi which helped India achieve independence from Great Britain, as well as modeling themselves after the Indian resistance movements against the Asiatic Land Tenure and Indian Representation Act, 1946 which disenfranchised Indian South Africans and restricted their ownership of land. Luthuli was committed to the idea of satyagraha and felt he had the power to mobilize the masses and end apartheid. Luthuli stated "We have declared to the world that we do not mean to use violence in furtherance of our cause. We will always follow the path of peace and non- violence in our legitimate demands for freedom."Luthuli traveled throughout Natal to organize the Defiance Campaign in Natal. The Natal Campaign began on August 1952 as a joint ANC-SAIC endeavor, marking the first large scale cooperation between Africans, Indians, and other racial groups in the province. Luthuli rallied thousands of people as Africans and Indians would defy segregation practices by using public facilities meant for Whites only, and Africans would defy the curfew laws in Durban. Over nine thousand people of all races went to jail for defying the apartheid laws. Overall, the Defiance Campaign lived up to its name. However, the apartheid government would soon use brute force to eliminate what they considered "subversive" activity. Although the Defiance Campaign didn't lead to any apartheid laws being repealed, it did lead to a dramatic increase in ANC membership from twenty-five thousand members in 1951 to one hundred thousand at the end of the Defiance Campaign.The Defiance Campaign was significant for the Natal Province where the memories of the Durban riots reinforced mutual suspicion and hostility between Indians and Africans. Even Gandhi and his son, Manilal Gandhi, exhibited racial antagonism toward Africans. Despite this, Luthuli's inclusive leadership style, admiration for Gandhi's satyagraha method, and close relationships with Indian leaders including Manilal Gandhi, led to unprecedented cooperation between Africans and Indians and quelling any distrust between the two communities.On August 1952, South African officials concluded that Luthuli's Defiance Campaign conflicted with his chiefly duties to administer and enforce government laws. Summoning Luthuli to Pretoria, Secretary of Native Affairs, Dr. W.W.M. Eiselen ordered Luthuli to resign from the ANC or his chieftain post. When two months passed, Luthuli refused to choose, and the government stripped him of his chieftainship, which included benefits such as paid school fees for his children. Luthuli insisted that a chief is a servant of their people not an agent of the government, so Africans assist the organization which fights for the well-being and rights of their people.At the ANC annual conference in December 1952, ANC delegates were impressed by Luthuli's "defiance of the government," and elected him ANC president over Moroka, who disavowed ANC policies in court after being arrested during the Defiance Campaign. Luthuli had taken the mantle of an organization where fifty-two leaders were banned, and twenty leaders and over eight thousand volunteers were convicted for Defiance Campaign activities. Luthuli visited national ANC branches throughout the country. In Port Elizabeth, Eastern Cape, twenty-five thousand people came to hear him speak against South African prime minister Malan and the apartheid system.In response to the Defiance Campaign, apartheid South Africa evolved further toward a police state, handing out bans which forced the Eastern Cape ANC branch underground and led to police raids of the homes of campaign leaders, including Luthuli, with the goal of confiscating Defiance Campaign documents, membership cards, and other files. With the introduction of the Public Safety Act and the Criminal Law Amendment Act in 1953, the country is able to declare states of emergency; suspend the rule of law; expand its arrest powers; and place restrictions on freedoms of speech, assembly, and movement. The judiciary was another instrument of domination, as the government convicted fifteen Defiance Campaign leaders in Port Elizabeth for violating the Suppression of Communism Act.[27]Luthuli condemned the National Party's "fascist dictatorship" and their "Anti-Defiance Acts." Luthuli lamented that apartheid was a "chain of bondage" that left Africans "prisoners in their own castle," nevertheless he celebrated the domestic and international support for the Defiance Campaign's fight for democracy and fundamental human rights which then would achieve racial harmony bringing South Africa into modern civilization. He felt that only an inclusive African nationalism, expressed by ANC-led multiracial coalition, could defeat apartheid and create an inclusive and democratic South Africa. Unlike the African nationalism of other South African anti-apartheid activists, Luthuli did not present whites and other racial groups as foreigners, but as permanent South African citizens.[28]Escalating violence marked the 1950s. Luthuli and others advocating for Gandhian nonviolent protests clashed with younger militants willing to consider armed self-defense in debates that surged during the Defiance Campaign. On November 9, 1952, after giving a sermon which compared apartheid South Africa with Nazi Germany, the police fired on ANC supporters praying with the Defiance Campaigners in East London's Duncan Village which would later be known as Black Sunday. Africans responded by burning government facilities. In the chaos, a few whites died, but militarized police killed two hundred-plus Duncan villagers, according to estimates. This event raised doubts within the ANC on whether civil disobedience was effective. Nelson Mandela, Walter Sisulu, and A.P. Mda, and the ANC Executive discussed the armed self-defense strategy and critiqued what seemed to be a "useless" nonviolent strategy, but for the time being they believed it would be "politically wise" to maintain a nonviolent strategy.[29]From the beginning of his presidency, Luthuli reckoned with concerns about communist influence in the ANC. Jordan Ngubane believed that Luthuli was the right leader for the ANC and its African nationalism and the right person to execute its Program of Action along with the Gandhian satyagraha methods of nonviolence. Luthuli was not opposed to the ANC creating multiracial connections, but Ngubane cautioned Luthuli about the negative impact of the ANC left wing, claiming that communists and leftists could impose their ideologies on African people who wanted African nationalism. He also pointed out that non-European leaders, notably in the Transvaal, will only adhere to nonviolence temporarily and feared that nonviolence could fall out of favor for armed self-defense. Luthuli believed that African nationalism and the resistance movements of the Indian National Congress of India were not communism but were ideas and methods of the ANC.[30]Luthuli's previous coordination with the Natal Indian Congress (NIC) president G.M. Naicker, vice president J.N. Singh, and future NIC vice president Ismail Meer during the Defiance Campaign lessened the previous animosity that lingered following the Durban Riots between the African and Indian community. As the president of the ANC, Luthuli built an alliance based on friendship between the communities. He organized a mass rally of several thousand people in Durban to protest the lack of educational facilities and opportunities for African and Indian children before police threw him in jail. Undeterred from his time in jail, Luthuli presided over an ANC-NIC joint meeting in Durban to protest the Public Safety Bill and the Criminal Law Amendment Bill. Luthuli and Naicker started a joint ANC-NIC protest statement and the ANC invited the NIC to join a planned stay-at-home during the national elections in April 1953, using the same nonviolent tactics used recently by the bus boycotters in Johannesburg. Under growing government threats to send Indian South Africans back to India, Luthuli addressed NIC conferences critiquing the Natives Land Acts, the Group Areas Act, and the Urban Areas Act as the primary reason as to why Africans have a lack of urban property, which Luthuli compared to Nazi Germany.[31]Naicker followed the call of Luthuli, "our President-General," to commemorate June 26, 1953—the third anniversary of the murder of Africans peacefully protesting by government forces, and the first anniversary of the Defiance Campaign—as Freedom Day, and urged all the NIC branches to participate. This day became a sacred day of service and rededicated the commitment to the freedom struggle in South Africa.[31]
<h2>Bans</h2>
In May 1953, the apartheid regime banned Luthuli and claimed that his political activities promoted hostility in the Union of South Africa between the European inhabitants and the non-European inhabitants of the Union. This ban confined Luthuli in Groutville and the surrounding district of Stanger as well as prohibiting him from entering major South African cities, making speeches, visiting the ANC, and attending political meetings or public gatherings (which the classified as five people or more together in the same space). Special Branch police increased their raids of Luthuli's house in search of "subversive" documents, and Minister of Native Affairs Hendrik Verwoerd denounced him in Parliament as a dangerous radical championing equal rights, and Prime Minister Malan called the ANC a terrorist group "on the pattern of the Mau Mau" in Kenya. South African authorities expressed their disappointment that Luthuli, previously regarded as a "good Native", had now been bought by the Indians and was under "Communist influence".[32]Another five-year ban confined him to a 15-mile (24 km) radius of his home. The ban was temporarily lifted while he testified at the continuing treason trials. It was lifted again in March 1960, to permit his arrest for publicly burning his pass following the Sharpeville massacre. In the ensuing state of emergency he was arrested, found guilty, fined, given a suspended jail sentence, and finally returned to Groutville. One final time the ban was lifted, this time for 10 days in early December 1961, to permit Luthuli and his wife to attend the Nobel Peace Prize ceremonies in Oslo, an award described by Die Transvaler as "an inexplicable pathological phenomenon".[33]
<h2>Nobel Prize of Peace</h2>
His speech during his presentation of the Nobel Prize was in support of non-violence and a call for human fraternity.[34]
<h2>uMkhonto we Sizwe</h2>
In December 1961, without Luthuli's sanction, Nelson Mandela of the Provincial ANC publicly launched uMkhonto we Sizwe at the All In Conference, where delegates from several movements had convened to discuss cooperation. Mandela's charisma and the global publicity surrounding his trial and imprisonment upstaged Luthuli, who grew increasingly despondent in isolation. (In Mandela's autobiography, he claims that Luthuli was consulted and consented before the formation of uMkhonto we Sizwe.)[35]In 1962, the following events took place:A fourth ban, to run for five years confining Luthuli to the immediate vicinity of his home, was issued in May 1964, to run concurrently with the third ban.In 1966, he was visited by United States Senator Robert F. Kennedy, who was visiting South Africa at the time. The two discussed the ANC's struggle. Senator Kennedy's visit to the country, and his meeting with Luthuli in particular, caused an increase of world awareness of the plight of black South Africans.[36]
<h2>Personal life</h2>
In 1927, he married Nokukhanya Bhengu, the granddaughter of the Zulu chief, Dhlokolo of the Ngcolosi.[37] The couple had seven children.[38] Luthuli spent his last years in enforced isolation while the African National Congress abandoned the policy of non-violence. He also suffered from high blood pressure, once having a slight stroke. As he grew older, his hearing and eyesight also became impaired.[39]On 21 July 1967, Luthuli was fatally injured when he was struck by a freight train while walking across a trestle bridge over the Umvuti River near his home in Stanger (now KwaDukuza).[40]
<h2>Veneration and Legacy</h2>
Luthuli is honoured with a feast day on the liturgical calendar of the Episcopal Church (USA) on 21 July, the day of his death in 1967.[41]Luthuli Street in Nairobi, famous for its electronic shops, is named in his honour.[42]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder Hjalmar Agne Carl secondnameplaceholder (/ˈhæmərʃʊld/ HAM-ər-shuuld,[1] Swedish: [ˈdɑːɡ ˈhâmːarˌɧœld] (listen); 29 July 1905 – 18 September 1961) was a Swedish economist and diplomat who served as the second Secretary-General of the United Nations. As of 2021, he remains the youngest person to have held the post, having been only 47 years old when he was appointed in 1953.secondnameplaceholder's tenure was characterized by efforts to strengthen the newly-formed UN both internally and externally. He led initiatives to improve morale and organisational efficiency while seeking to make the UN more responsive to global issues. He presided over the creation of the first UN peacekeeping forces in Egypt and the Congo, and personally intervened to defuse or resolve diplomatic crises. secondnameplaceholder's second term was cut short when he died in a plane crash while en route to cease-fire negotiations during the Congo Crisis.secondnameplaceholder was and remains well regarded internationally as a capable diplomat and administrator, and his efforts to resolve various global crises led to him being the only posthumous recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize.[2] He is considered one of the two best UN secretaries-general, along with his successor U Thant,[3] and his appointment has been hailed as one of the most notable successes for the organization.[4] U.S. President John F. Kennedy called secondnameplaceholder "the greatest statesman of our century."[5]
<h2>Early life and education</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was born in Jönköping to the noble family secondnameplaceholder (also spelled Hammarskiöld or Hammarsköld). He spent most of his childhood in Uppsala. His home there, which he considered his childhood home, was Uppsala Castle. He was the fourth and youngest son of Hjalmar secondnameplaceholder, Prime Minister of Sweden from 1914 to 1917.[6]secondnameplaceholder studied first at Katedralskolan and then at Uppsala University. By 1930, he had obtained Licentiate of Philosophy and Master of Laws degrees. Before he finished his law degree he had already obtained a job as Assistant Secretary of the Unemployment Committee.[7]
<h2>Career</h2>
From 1930 to 1934, secondnameplaceholder was Secretary of a governmental committee on unemployment. During this time he wrote his economics thesis, "Konjunkturspridningen" ("The Spread of the Business Cycle"), and received a doctorate from Stockholm University. In 1936, he became a secretary in Sweden's central bank, the Riksbank. From 1941 to 1948, he served as chairman of the Riksbank's General Council.[8]secondnameplaceholder quickly developed a successful career as a Swedish public servant. He was state secretary in the Ministry of Finance 1936–1945, Swedish delegate to the Organization for European Economic Cooperation 1947–1953, cabinet secretary for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 1949–1951 and minister without portfolio in Tage Erlander's government 1951–1953.[8]He helped coordinate government plans to alleviate the economic problems of the post-World War II period and was a delegate to the Paris conference that established the Marshall Plan. In 1950, he became head of the Swedish delegation to UNISCAN, a forum to promote economic cooperation between the United Kingdom and the Scandinavian countries.[9] Although secondnameplaceholder served in a cabinet dominated by the Social Democrats, he never officially joined any political party.[8]In 1951, secondnameplaceholder was vice chairman of the Swedish delegation to the United Nations General Assembly in Paris. He became the chairman of the Swedish delegation to the General Assembly in New York in 1952. On 20 December 1954, he was elected to take his father's vacated seat in the Swedish Academy.[10]
<h2>United Nations Secretary-General</h2>
On 10 November 1952 Trygve Lie announced his resignation as Secretary-General of the United Nations. Several months of negotiations ensued between the Western powers and the Soviet Union, without reaching an agreement on his successor. On 13 and 19 March 1953, the Security Council voted on four candidates. Lester B. Pearson of Canada was the only candidate to receive the required majority, but he was vetoed by the Soviet Union.[11][12] At a consultation of the permanent members on 30 March 1953,[13] French ambassador Henri Hoppenot suggested four candidates, including secondnameplaceholder, whom he had met at the Organisation for European Economic Cooperation.[14]The superpowers hoped to seat a Secretary-General who would focus on administrative issues and refrain from participating in political discussion. secondnameplaceholder's reputation at the time was, in the words of biographer Emery Kelèn, "that of a brilliant economist, an unobtrusive technician, and an aristo-bureaucrat". As a result, there was little to no controversy in his selection;[15] the Soviet permanent representative, Valerian Zorin, found secondnameplaceholder "harmless".[16] Zorin declared that he would be voting for secondnameplaceholder, surprising the Western powers.[17] The announcement set off a flurry of diplomatic activity. British Foreign Secretary Anthony Eden was strongly in favor of secondnameplaceholder and asked the United States to "take any appropriate action to induce the [Nationalist] Chinese to abstain."[18] (Sweden recognized the People's Republic of China and faced a potential veto from the Republic of China.) At the U.S. State Department, the nomination "came as a complete surprise to everyone here and we started scrambling around to find out who Mr. Hammarskjold was and what his qualifications were."[19] The State Department authorized Henry Cabot Lodge Jr., the US Ambassador, to vote in favor after he told them that secondnameplaceholder "may be as good as we can get."[20][21]On 31 March 1953, the Security Council voted 10-0-1 to recommend secondnameplaceholder to the General Assembly, with an abstention from Nationalist China.[22] Shortly after midnight on 1 April 1953, secondnameplaceholder was awakened by a telephone call from a journalist with the news, which he dismissed as an April Fool's Day joke.[a] He finally believed the news after the third phone call.[14] The Swedish mission in New York confirmed the nomination at 03:00 and a communique from the Security Council was soon thereafter delivered to him.[23] After consulting with the Swedish cabinet and his father, secondnameplaceholder decided to accept the nomination.[22] He sent a wire to the Security Council:[24]Later in the day secondnameplaceholder held a press conference at the Swedish Foreign Ministry. According to diplomat Sverker Åström, he displayed an intense interest and knowledge in the affairs of the UN, which he had never shown any indication of before.[24]The U.N. General Assembly voted 57-1-1 on 7 April 1953 to appoint firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder as Secretary-General of the United Nations. secondnameplaceholder was sworn in as Secretary-General on 10 April 1953.[22] He was unanimously reelected on 26 September 1957 for another term, taking effect on 10 April 1958.[25]Immediately following the assumption of the Secretariat, secondnameplaceholder attempted to establish a good rapport with his staff. He made a point of visiting every UN department to shake hands with as many workers as possible, eating in the cafeteria as often as possible, and relinquishing the Secretary-General's private elevator for general use.[26] He began his term by establishing his own secretariat of 4,000 administrators and setting up regulations that defined their responsibilities. He was also actively engaged in smaller projects relating to the UN working environment; for example, he spearheaded the building of a meditation room at the UN headquarters, where people can withdraw into themselves in silence, regardless of their faith, creed, or religion.[27]During his term, secondnameplaceholder tried to improve relations between Israel and the Arab states. Other highlights include a 1955 visit to China to negotiate the release of 11 captured US pilots who had served in the Korean War,[6] the 1956 establishment of the United Nations Emergency Force, and his intervention in the 1956 Suez Crisis. He is given credit by some historians for allowing participation of the Holy See within the United Nations that year.[28]In 1960, the newly independent Congo asked for UN aid in defusing the Congo Crisis. secondnameplaceholder made four trips to Congo, but his efforts toward the decolonisation of Africa were considered insufficient by the Soviet Union; in September 1960, the Soviet government denounced his decision to send a UN emergency force to keep the peace. They demanded his resignation and the replacement of the office of Secretary-General by a three-man directorate with a built-in veto, the "troika." The objective was, citing the memoirs of Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, to "equally represent interests of three groups of countries: capitalist, socialist and recently independent."[29][7]
<h2>Death</h2>
On 18 September 1961, secondnameplaceholder was en route to negotiate a cease-fire between United Nations Operation in the Congo forces and Katangese troops under Moise Tshombe. His Douglas DC-6 airliner SE-BDY crashed near Ndola, Northern Rhodesia (now Zambia). secondnameplaceholder perished in the crash, as did all but one of the 16 passengers, who died from injuries a few days later. secondnameplaceholder's death set off a succession crisis at the United Nations,[30] as there was no line of succession and the Security Council had to vote on a successor.[31]The circumstances of the crash are still unclear. A 1962 Rhodesian inquiry concluded that pilot error was to blame, while a later UN investigation could not determine the cause of the crash.[32] There is evidence suggesting the plane was shot down.[33][34][35] A CIA report claimed the KGB was responsible.[36]The day after the crash, former U.S. President Harry Truman commented that secondnameplaceholder "was on the point of getting something done when they killed him. Notice that I said 'when they killed him'."[36]In 1998, documents surfaced suggesting CIA, MI6, and/or Belgian mining interest involvement via a South African paramilitary organization. The information was contained in a file from the South African National Intelligence Agency turned over to the South African Truth and Reconciliation Commission in relation to the 1993 assassination of Chris Hani, leader of the South African Communist Party. These documents included an alleged plot to "remove" secondnameplaceholder and contained a supposed statement from CIA director Allen Dulles that "firstnameplaceholder is becoming troublesome … and should be removed." secondnameplaceholder's mission to end the war over the mineral-rich Katangese secession from the newly formed Republic of the Congo was contrary to the interests of those organizations. However these documents were copies rather than originals, precluding substantiation of authenticity through ink and paper testing.[32]Göran Björkdahl, a Swedish aid worker whose father worked for the UN in Zambia, wrote in 2011 that he believed secondnameplaceholder's death was a murder committed, in part, to benefit mining companies like Union Minière, after secondnameplaceholder had made the UN intervene in the Katanga crisis. Björkdahl based his assertion on interviews with witnesses of the plane crash near the border of the DRC with Zambia and on archival documents.[37][38]In 2013 accident investigator Sven Hammarberg was asked by the International Commission of Jurists to investigate secondnameplaceholder's death.[39]In 2014, newly declassified documents revealed that the American ambassador to the Congo sent a cable to Washington D.C. warning that the plane could have been shot down by Belgian mercenary pilot Jan van Risseghem, commander of the small Katanga Air Force. Van Risseghem died in 2007.[34]On 16 March 2015, United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon appointed members to an Independent Panel of Experts to examine new information related to secondnameplaceholder's death. The three-member panel was led by Mohamed Chande Othman, the Chief Justice of Tanzania, and included Kerryn Macaulay (Australia's representative to the ICAO) and Henrik Larsen (a ballistics expert from the Danish National Police).[40] The panel's 99-page report, released 6 July 2015, assigned "moderate" value to nine new eyewitness accounts and transcripts of radio transmissions. Those accounts suggested that secondnameplaceholder's plane was already on fire as it landed and that other jet aircraft and intelligence agents were nearby.[41]In 2016, the original documents from the 1998 South African investigation surfaced. Those familiar with the investigation cautioned that even if authentic, the documents could have been initially authored as part of a disinformation campaign.[32]In 2019, the documentary film Cold Case secondnameplaceholder by Danish filmmaker Mads Brügger claimed that Jan van Risseghem had told a friend that he shot down secondnameplaceholder's aircraft. This went against the official stance maintained by van Risseghem's family that he was not involved in the death of secondnameplaceholder. According to an interview with van Risseghem's wife, he was in Rhodesia negotiating the purchase of a plane for the Katanga Air Force and the logbooks provided "proof that he was not flying for Katanga at the time". The documentary crew interviewed multiple colleagues of van Risseghem for the film, all of whom supported their theory.[42][43][44] In an interview with Swedish historian Leif Hellström, van Risseghem claimed that he was not in southern Africa at the time it happened, and dismissed the idea of being potentially involved as “fairy stories”.[44]In secondnameplaceholder's 1959 will he left his personal archive to the National Library of Sweden.[45]
<h2>Personal life</h2>
Following his appointment as UN Secretary-General, secondnameplaceholder carried a copy of the oath of office with him on his travels. It was found in one of his books in the Ndola crash site.[46]In 1953, soon after his appointment as United Nations Secretary-General, secondnameplaceholder was interviewed on radio by Edward R. Murrow. In this talk secondnameplaceholder declared:secondnameplaceholder's only book, Vägmärken (Markings, or more literally Waymarks), was published in 1963. A collection of his diary reflections, the book starts in 1925, when he was 20 years old, and ends the month before his death in 1961.[48] This diary was found in his New York house, after his death, along with an undated letter addressed to then Swedish Permanent Under-Secretary for Foreign Affairs, Leif Belfrage. In this letter, secondnameplaceholder wrote:The foreword is written by the English poet W. H. Auden, a friend of secondnameplaceholder's.[49]Markings was described by the late theologian Henry P. Van Dusen as "the noblest self-disclosure of spiritual struggle and triumph, perhaps the greatest testament of personal faith written ... in the heat of professional life and amidst the most exacting responsibilities for world peace and order."[50] secondnameplaceholder wrote, for example:Markings is characterised by secondnameplaceholder's intermingling of prose and haiku poetry in a manner exemplified by the 17th-century Japanese poet Basho in his Narrow Roads to the Deep North.[52] In his foreword to Markings, W. H. Auden quotes secondnameplaceholder as stating:The Evangelical Lutheran Church in America commemorates the life of secondnameplaceholder as a renewer of society, on the anniversary of his death, 18 September.[54]
<h2>Depictions in popular culture</h2>
In the 2016 film The Siege of Jadotville, depicting the events of the Congo Crisis,[68] secondnameplaceholder is played by fellow Swede Mikael Persbrandt.
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder Carl secondnameplaceholder (/ˈpɔːlɪŋ/; February 28, 1901 – August 19, 1994)[4] was an American chemist, biochemist, chemical engineer,  peace activist, author, and educator. He published more than 1,200 papers and books, of which about 850 dealt with scientific topics.[5] New Scientist called him one of the 20 greatest scientists of all time,[6] and as of 2000, he was rated the 16th most important scientist in history.[7] For his scientific work, secondnameplaceholder was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1954. For his peace activism, he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1962. He is one of four individuals to have won more than one Nobel Prize (the others being Marie Curie, John Bardeen and Frederick Sanger).[8] Of these, he is the only person to have been awarded two unshared Nobel Prizes,[9] and one of two people to be awarded Nobel Prizes in different fields, the other being Marie Curie.[8] He was married to the American human rights activist Ava Helen secondnameplaceholder.secondnameplaceholder was one of the founders of the fields of quantum chemistry and molecular biology.[10] His contributions to the theory of the chemical bond include the concept of orbital hybridisation and the first accurate scale of electronegativities of the elements. secondnameplaceholder also worked on the structures of biological molecules, and showed the importance of the alpha helix and beta sheet in protein secondary structure. secondnameplaceholder's approach combined methods and results from X-ray crystallography, molecular model building, and quantum chemistry. His discoveries inspired the work of James Watson, Francis Crick, Maurice Wilkins and Rosalind Franklin on the structure of DNA, which in turn made it possible for geneticists to crack the DNA code of all organisms.[11]In his later years he promoted nuclear disarmament, as well as orthomolecular medicine, megavitamin therapy,[12] and dietary supplements. None of his ideas concerning the medical usefulness of large doses of vitamins have gained much acceptance in the mainstream scientific community.[6][13]
<h2>Early life and education</h2>
firstnameplaceholder Carl secondnameplaceholder was born on February 28, 1901, in Portland, Oregon,[14][15] the firstborn child of Herman Henry William secondnameplaceholder (1876–1910) and Lucy Isabelle "Belle" Darling (1881–1926).[16] He was named "firstnameplaceholder Carl", in honor of Lucy's father, firstnameplaceholder, and Herman's father, Carl.[17] His father was German while his mother was English.In 1902, after his sister Pauline was born, secondnameplaceholder's parents decided to move out of Portland, to find more affordable and spacious living quarters than their one-room apartment.[18] Lucy stayed with her husband's parents in Lake Oswego until Herman brought the family to Salem, where he worked briefly as a traveling salesman for the Skidmore Drug Company. Within a year of Lucile's birth in 1904, Herman secondnameplaceholder moved his family to Lake Oswego, where he opened his own drugstore.[18] He moved his family to Condon, Oregon, in 1905.[19] By 1906, Herman secondnameplaceholder was suffering from recurrent abdominal pain. He died of a perforated ulcer on June 11, 1910, leaving Lucy to care for firstnameplaceholder, Lucile and Pauline.[20]secondnameplaceholder attributes his interest in becoming a chemist to being amazed by experiments conducted by a friend, Lloyd A. Jeffress, who had a small chemistry lab kit.[21] He later wrote: "I was simply entranced by chemical phenomena, by the reactions in which substances, often with strikingly different properties, appear; and I hoped to learn more and more about this aspect of the world."[22]In high school, secondnameplaceholder conducted chemistry experiments by scavenging equipment and material from an abandoned steel plant. With an older friend, Lloyd Simon, secondnameplaceholder set up Palmon Laboratories in Simon's basement.  They approached local dairies offering to perform butterfat samplings at cheap prices but dairymen were wary of trusting two boys with the task, and the business ended in failure.[23]At age 15, the high school senior had enough credits to enter Oregon State University (OSU), known then as Oregon Agricultural College.[24] Lacking two American history courses required for his high school diploma, secondnameplaceholder asked the school principal if he could take the courses concurrently during the spring semester. Denied, he left Washington High School in June without a diploma.[25] The school awarded him an honorary diploma 45 years later, after he was awarded two Nobel Prizes.[8][26][27]secondnameplaceholder held a number of jobs to earn money for his future college expenses, including working part-time at a grocery store for $8 per week (equivalent to $190 in 2020). His mother arranged an interview with the owner of a number of manufacturing plants in Portland, Mr. Schwietzerhoff, who hired him as an apprentice machinist at a salary of $40 per month (equivalent to $950 in 2020). This was soon raised to $50 per month.[28] secondnameplaceholder also set up a photography laboratory with two friends.[29] In September 1917, secondnameplaceholder was finally admitted by Oregon State University. He immediately resigned from the machinist's job and informed his mother, who saw no point in a university education, of his plans.[30]In his first semester, secondnameplaceholder registered for two courses in chemistry, two in mathematics, mechanical drawing, introduction to mining and use of explosives, modern English prose, gymnastics and military drill.[31] He was active in campus life and founded the school's chapter of the Delta Upsilon fraternity.[32] After his second year, he planned to take a job in Portland to help support his mother. The college offered him a position teaching quantitative analysis, a course he had just finished taking himself. He worked forty hours a week in the laboratory and classroom and earned $100 a month (equivalent to $1,300 in 2020), enabling him to continue his studies.[33]In his last two years at school, secondnameplaceholder became aware of the work of Gilbert N. Lewis and Irving Langmuir on the electronic structure of atoms and their bonding to form molecules.[33] He decided to focus his research on how the physical and chemical properties of substances are related to the structure of the atoms of which they are composed, becoming one of the founders of the new science of quantum chemistry.Engineering professor Samuel Graf selected secondnameplaceholder to be his teaching assistant in a mechanics and materials course.[34][35][36] During the winter of his senior year, secondnameplaceholder taught a chemistry course for home economics majors. It was in one of these classes that secondnameplaceholder met his future wife, Ava Helen Miller.[35]:41[37][38][39]In 1922, secondnameplaceholder graduated with a degree in chemical engineering. He went on to graduate school at the California Institute of Technology (Caltech) in Pasadena, California, under the guidance of Roscoe Dickinson and Richard Tolman.[1] His graduate research involved the use of X-ray diffraction to determine the structure of crystals. He published seven papers on the crystal structure of minerals while he was at Caltech. He received his PhD in physical chemistry and mathematical physics,[3] summa cum laude, in 1925.[40]
<h2>Career</h2>
In 1926, secondnameplaceholder was awarded a Guggenheim Fellowship to travel to Europe, to study under German physicist Arnold Sommerfeld in Munich, Danish physicist Niels Bohr in Copenhagen and Austrian physicist Erwin Schrödinger in Zürich. All three were experts in the new field of quantum mechanics and other branches of physics.[2] secondnameplaceholder became interested in how quantum mechanics might be applied in his chosen field of interest, the electronic structure of atoms and molecules. In Zürich, secondnameplaceholder was also exposed to one of the first quantum mechanical analyses of bonding in the hydrogen molecule, done by Walter Heitler and Fritz London.[41] secondnameplaceholder devoted the two years of his European trip to this work and decided to make it the focus of his future research. He became one of the first scientists in the field of quantum chemistry and a pioneer in the application of quantum theory to the structure of molecules.[42]In 1927, secondnameplaceholder took a new position as an assistant professor at Caltech in theoretical chemistry.[43] He launched his faculty career with a very productive five years, continuing with his X-ray crystal studies and also performing quantum mechanical calculations on atoms and molecules. He published approximately fifty papers in those five years, and created the five rules now known as secondnameplaceholder's rules.[44][45] By 1929, he was promoted to associate professor, and by 1930, to full professor.[43] In 1931, the American Chemical Society awarded secondnameplaceholder the Langmuir Prize for the most significant work in pure science by a person 30 years of age or younger.[46] The following year, secondnameplaceholder published what he regarded as his most important paper, in which he first laid out the concept of hybridization of atomic orbitals and analyzed the tetravalency of the carbon atom.[47]At Caltech, secondnameplaceholder struck up a close friendship with theoretical physicist Robert Oppenheimer, who spent part of his research and teaching schedule away from U.C. Berkeley at Caltech every year.[48][49] secondnameplaceholder was also affiliated to UC Berkeley as Visiting Lecturer in Physics and Chemistry from 1929 to 1934.[50] Oppenheimer even gave secondnameplaceholder a stunning personal collection of minerals.[51]  The two men planned to mount a joint attack on the nature of the chemical bond: apparently Oppenheimer would supply the mathematics and secondnameplaceholder would interpret the results. Their relationship soured when Oppenheimer tried to pursue secondnameplaceholder's wife, Ava Helen. When secondnameplaceholder was at work, Oppenheimer came to their home and blurted out an invitation to Ava Helen to join him on a tryst in Mexico. She flatly refused, and reported the incident to secondnameplaceholder. He immediately cut off his relationship with Oppenheimer.[48]:152[49]In the summer of 1930, secondnameplaceholder made another European trip, during which he learned about gas-phase electron diffraction from Herman Francis Mark. After returning, he built an electron diffraction instrument at Caltech with a student of his, Lawrence Olin Brockway, and used it to study the molecular structure of a large number of chemical substances.[52]secondnameplaceholder introduced the concept of electronegativity in 1932.[53] Using the various properties of molecules, such as the energy required to break bonds and the dipole moments of molecules, he established a scale and an associated numerical value for most of the elements – the secondnameplaceholder Electronegativity Scale – which is useful in predicting the nature of bonds between atoms in molecules.[54]In 1936, secondnameplaceholder was promoted to Chairman of the Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Caltech, and to the position of Director of the Gates and Crellin laboratories of Chemistry. He would hold both positions until 1958.[43] secondnameplaceholder also spent a year in 1948 at the University of Oxford as George Eastman Visiting Professor and Fellow of Balliol.[55]In the late 1920s, secondnameplaceholder began publishing papers on the nature of the chemical bond. Between 1937 and 1938, he took a position as George Fischer Baker Non-Resident Lecturer in Chemistry at Cornell University. While at Cornell, he delivered a series of nineteen lectures[56] and completed the bulk of his famous textbook The Nature of the Chemical Bond.[57][58]:Preface It is based primarily on his work in this area that he received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1954 "for his research into the nature of the chemical bond and its application to the elucidation of the structure of complex substances".[8] secondnameplaceholder's book has been considered "chemistry's most influential book of this century and its effective bible".[59] In the 30 years after its first edition was published in 1939, the book was cited more than 16,000 times. Even today, many modern scientific papers and articles in important journals cite this work, more than seventy years after the first publication.[60]Part of secondnameplaceholder's work on the nature of the chemical bond led to his introduction of the concept of orbital hybridization.[61] While it is normal to think of the electrons in an atom as being described by orbitals of types such as s and p, it turns out that in describing the bonding in molecules, it is better to construct functions that partake of some of the properties of each. Thus the one 2s and three 2p orbitals in a carbon atom can be (mathematically) 'mixed' or combined to make four equivalent orbitals (called sp3 hybrid orbitals), which would be the appropriate orbitals to describe carbon compounds such as methane, or the 2s orbital may be combined with two of the 2p orbitals to make three equivalent orbitals (called sp2 hybrid orbitals), with the remaining 2p orbital unhybridized, which would be the appropriate orbitals to describe certain unsaturated carbon compounds such as ethylene.[58]:111–120 Other hybridization schemes are also found in other types of molecules.
Another area which he explored was the relationship between ionic bonding, where electrons are transferred between atoms, and covalent bonding, where electrons are shared between atoms on an equal basis. secondnameplaceholder showed that these were merely extremes, and that for most actual cases of bonding, the quantum-mechanical wave function for a polar molecule AB is a combination of wave functions for covalent and ionic molecules.[45]:66 Here secondnameplaceholder's electronegativity concept is particularly useful; the electronegativity difference between a pair of atoms will be the surest predictor of the degree of ionicity of the bond.[62]The third of the topics that secondnameplaceholder attacked under the overall heading of "the nature of the chemical bond" was the accounting of the structure of aromatic hydrocarbons, particularly the prototype, benzene.[63] The best description of benzene had been made by the German chemist Friedrich Kekulé. He had treated it as a rapid interconversion between two structures, each with alternating single and double bonds, but with the double bonds of one structure in the locations where the single bonds were in the other. secondnameplaceholder showed that a proper description based on quantum mechanics was an intermediate structure which was a blend of each. The structure was a superposition of structures rather than a rapid interconversion between them. The name "resonance" was later applied to this phenomenon.[64] In a sense, this phenomenon resembles those of hybridization and also polar bonding, both described above, because all three phenomena involve combining more than one electronic structure to achieve an intermediate result.In 1929, secondnameplaceholder published five rules which help to predict and explain crystal structures of ionic compounds.[65][45] 
These rules concern (1) the ratio of cation radius to anion radius, (2) the electrostatic bond strength, (3) the sharing of polyhedron corners, edges and faces, (4) crystals containing different cations, and (5) the rule of parsimony.In the mid-1930s, secondnameplaceholder, strongly influenced by the biologically oriented funding priorities of the Rockefeller Foundation's Warren Weaver, decided to strike out into new areas of interest.[66] Although secondnameplaceholder's early interest had focused almost exclusively on inorganic molecular structures, he had occasionally thought about molecules of biological importance, in part because of Caltech's growing strength in biology. secondnameplaceholder interacted with such great biologists as Thomas Hunt Morgan, Theodosius Dobzhanski, Calvin Bridges and Alfred Sturtevant.[67] His early work in this area included studies of the structure of hemoglobin with his student Charles D. Coryell. He demonstrated that the hemoglobin molecule changes structure when it gains or loses an oxygen atom.[67] As a result of this observation, he decided to conduct a more thorough study of protein structure in general. He returned to his earlier use of X-ray diffraction analysis. But protein structures were far less amenable to this technique than the crystalline minerals of his former work. The best X-ray pictures of proteins in the 1930s had been made by the British crystallographer William Astbury, but when secondnameplaceholder tried, in 1937, to account for Astbury's observations quantum mechanically, he could not.[68]It took eleven years for secondnameplaceholder to explain the problem: his mathematical analysis was correct, but Astbury's pictures were taken in such a way that the protein molecules were tilted from their expected positions. secondnameplaceholder had formulated a model for the structure of hemoglobin in which atoms were arranged in a helical pattern, and applied this idea to proteins in general.In 1951, based on the structures of amino acids and peptides and the planar nature of the peptide bond, secondnameplaceholder, Robert Corey and Herman Branson correctly proposed the alpha helix and beta sheet as the primary structural motifs in protein secondary structure.[69][70] This work exemplified secondnameplaceholder's ability to think unconventionally; central to the structure was the unorthodox assumption that one turn of the helix may well contain a non-integer number of amino acid residues; for the alpha helix it is 3.7 amino acid residues per turn.secondnameplaceholder then proposed that deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) was a triple helix;[71][72] his model contained several basic mistakes, including a proposal of neutral phosphate groups, an idea that conflicted with the acidity of DNA. Sir Lawrence Bragg had been disappointed that secondnameplaceholder had won the race to find the alpha helix structure of proteins. Bragg's team had made a fundamental error in making their models of protein by not recognizing the planar nature of the peptide bond. When it was learned at the Cavendish Laboratory that secondnameplaceholder was working on molecular models of the structure of DNA, James Watson and Francis Crick were allowed to make a molecular model of DNA. They later benefited from unpublished data from Maurice Wilkins and Rosalind Franklin at King's College which showed evidence for a helix and planar base stacking along the helix axis. Early in 1953 Watson and Crick proposed a correct structure for the DNA double helix. secondnameplaceholder later cited several reasons to explain how he had been misled about the structure of DNA, among them misleading density data and the lack of high quality X-ray diffraction photographs. During the time secondnameplaceholder was researching the problem, Rosalind Franklin in England was creating the world's best images. They were key to Watson's and Crick's success. secondnameplaceholder did not see them before devising his mistaken DNA structure, although his assistant Robert Corey did see at least some of them, while taking secondnameplaceholder's place at a summer 1952 protein conference in England. secondnameplaceholder had been prevented from attending because his passport was withheld by the State Department on suspicion that he had Communist sympathies. This led to the legend that secondnameplaceholder missed the structure of DNA because of the politics of the day (this was at the start of the McCarthy period in the United States). Politics did not play a critical role. Not only did Corey see the images at the time, but secondnameplaceholder himself regained his passport within a few weeks and toured English laboratories well before writing his DNA paper. He had ample opportunity to visit Franklin's lab and see her work, but chose not to.[48]:414–415secondnameplaceholder also studied enzyme reactions and was among the first to point out that enzymes bring about reactions by stabilizing the transition state of the reaction, a view which is central to understanding their mechanism of action.[73] He was also among the first scientists to postulate that the binding of antibodies to antigens would be due to a complementarity between their structures.[74] Along the same lines, with the physicist turned biologist Max Delbrück, he wrote an early paper arguing that DNA replication was likely to be due to complementarity, rather than similarity, as suggested by a few researchers. This was made clear in the model of the structure of DNA that Watson and Crick discovered.[75]In November 1949, secondnameplaceholder, Harvey Itano, S. J. Singer and Ibert Wells published "Sickle Cell Anemia, a Molecular Disease"[76] in the journal Science. It was the first proof of a human disease being caused by an abnormal protein, and sickle cell anemia became the first disease understood at the molecular level. (It was not, however, the first demonstration that variant forms of hemoglobin could be distinguished by electrophoresis, which had been shown several years earlier by Maud Menten and collaborators).[77] Using electrophoresis, they demonstrated that individuals with sickle cell disease have a modified form of hemoglobin in their red blood cells, and that individuals with sickle cell trait have both the normal and abnormal forms of hemoglobin. This was the first demonstration causally linking an abnormal protein to a disease, and also the first demonstration that Mendelian inheritance determines the specific physical properties of proteins, not simply their presence or absence – the dawn of molecular genetics.[78]His success with sickle cell anemia led secondnameplaceholder to speculate that a number of other diseases, including mental illnesses such as schizophrenia, might result from flawed genetics. As chairman of the Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering and director of the Gates and Crellin Chemical Laboratories, he encouraged the hiring of researchers with a chemical-biomedical approach to mental illness, a direction not always popular with established Caltech chemists.[79]:2In 1951, secondnameplaceholder gave a lecture entitled "Molecular Medicine".[80] In the late 1950s, secondnameplaceholder studied the role of enzymes in brain function, believing that mental illness may be partly caused by enzyme dysfunction.On September 16, 1952, secondnameplaceholder opened a new research notebook with the words "I have decided to attack the problem of the structure of nuclei." On October 15, 1965, secondnameplaceholder published his Close-Packed Spheron Model of the atomic nucleus in two well respected journals, Science and the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.[81][82] For nearly three decades, until his death in 1994, secondnameplaceholder published numerous papers on his spheron cluster model.[81][83][84][85][86][87]The basic idea behind secondnameplaceholder's spheron model is that a nucleus can be viewed as a set of "clusters of nucleons". The basic nucleon clusters include the deuteron [np], helion [pnp], and triton [npn]. Even–even nuclei are described as being composed of clusters of alpha particles, as has often been done for light nuclei.[88] secondnameplaceholder attempted to derive the shell structure of nuclei from pure geometrical considerations related to Platonic solids rather than starting from an independent particle model as in the usual shell model. In an interview given in 1990 secondnameplaceholder commented on his model:[89]
<h2>Activism</h2>
secondnameplaceholder had been practically apolitical until World War II. At the beginning of the Manhattan Project, Robert Oppenheimer invited him to be in charge of the Chemistry division of the project. However, he declined, not wanting to uproot his family.[90]secondnameplaceholder did, however, work on research for the military. He was a principal investigator on 14 OSRD contracts.[91]  The National Defense Research Committee called a meeting on October 3, 1940, wanting an instrument that could reliably measure oxygen content in a mixture of gases, so that they could measure oxygen conditions in submarines and airplanes. In response secondnameplaceholder designed the secondnameplaceholder oxygen meter, which was developed and manufactured by Arnold O. Beckman, Inc. After the war, Beckman adapted the oxygen analyzers for use in incubators for premature babies.[92]:180–186[93]In 1942, secondnameplaceholder successfully submitted a proposal on "The Chemical Treatment of Protein Solutions in the Attempt to Find a Substitute for Human Serum for Transfusions". His project group, which included J.B. Koepfli and Dan Campbell, developed a possible replacement for human blood plasma in transfusions: polyoxy gelatin (Oxypolygelatin).[94][95]Other wartime projects with more direct military applications included work on explosives, rocket propellants and the patent for an armor-piercing shell.  In October 1948 secondnameplaceholder was awarded a Presidential Medal for Merit by President Harry S. Truman.  The citation credits him for his "imaginative mind", "brilliant success", and "exceptionally meritorious conduct in the performance of outstanding services.[96][97][98]  In 1949, he served as president of the American Chemical Society.[99]The aftermath of the Manhattan Project and his wife Ava's pacifism changed secondnameplaceholder's life profoundly, and he became a peace activist.In June 1945, a "May-Johnson Bill" began[100][101][102] that would become the Atomic Energy Act of 1946 (signed August 1, 1946). In November 1945, secondnameplaceholder spoke to the Independent Citizens Committee of the Arts, Sciences and Professions (ICCASP) on atomic weapons; shortly after, wife Ava and he accepted membership.[103]  On January 21, 1946, the group met to discuss academic freedom, during which secondnameplaceholder said, "There is, of course, always a threat to academic freedom – as there is to the other aspects of the freedom and rights of the individual, in the continued attacks which are made on this freedom, these rights, by the selfish, the overly ambitious, the misguided, the unscrupulous, who seek to oppress the great body of mankind in order that they themselves may profit – and we must always be on the alert against this threat, and must fight it with vigor when it becomes dangerous."[103]In 1946, he joined the Emergency Committee of Atomic Scientists, chaired by Albert Einstein.[104] Its mission was to warn the public of the dangers associated with the development of nuclear weapons.His political activism prompted the US State Department to deny him a passport in 1952, when he was invited to speak at a scientific conference in London.[105][106] In a speech before the US Senate on June 6 of the same year, Senator Wayne Morse publicly denounced the action of the State Department, and urged the Passport Division to reverse its decision. secondnameplaceholder and his wife Ava were then issued a "limited passport" to attend the aforementioned conference in England.[107][108] His full passport was restored in 1954, shortly before the ceremony in Stockholm where he received his first Nobel Prize.Joining Einstein, Bertrand Russell and eight other leading scientists and intellectuals, he signed the Russell-Einstein Manifesto issued July 9, 1955.[109] He also supported the Mainau Declaration  of July 15, 1955, signed by 52 Nobel Prize laureates.[110]In May 1957, working with  Washington University in St. Louis professor Barry Commoner, secondnameplaceholder began to circulate a petition among scientists to stop nuclear testing.[111]  On January 15, 1958, secondnameplaceholder and his wife presented a petition to United Nations Secretary General Dag Hammarskjöld calling for an end to the testing of nuclear weapons.  It was signed by 11,021 scientists representing fifty countries.[112][113]In February 1958, secondnameplaceholder participated in a publicly televised debate with the atomic physicist Edward Teller about the actual probability of fallout causing mutations.[114]  Later in 1958, secondnameplaceholder published No more war!, in which he not only called for an end to the testing of nuclear weapons but also an end to war itself . He proposed that a World Peace Research Organization be set up as part of the United Nations to "attack the problem of preserving the peace".[8]secondnameplaceholder also supported the work of the St. Louis Citizen's Committee for Nuclear Information (CNI).[111] This group, headed by Barry Commoner, Eric Reiss,  M. W. Friedlander and John Fowler, organized a longitudinal study to measure radioactive strontium-90 in the baby teeth of children across North America.  The "Baby Tooth Survey," published by Dr. Louise Reiss, demonstrated conclusively in 1961 that above-ground nuclear testing posed significant public health risks in the form of radioactive fallout spread primarily via milk from cows that had ingested contaminated grass.[115][116][117]  The Committee for Nuclear Information is frequently credited for its significant contribution to supporting the test ban,[118] as is the ground-breaking research conducted by Dr. Reiss and the "Baby Tooth Survey".[119]Public pressure and the frightening results of the CNI research subsequently led to a moratorium on above-ground nuclear weapons testing, followed by the Partial Test Ban Treaty, signed in 1963 by John F. Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev.  On the day that the treaty went into force, October 10, 1963, the Nobel Prize Committee awarded secondnameplaceholder the Nobel Peace Prize for 1962.  (No prize had previously been awarded for that year.)[120]  They described him as "firstnameplaceholder Carl secondnameplaceholder, who ever since 1946 has campaigned ceaselessly, not only against nuclear weapons tests, not only against the spread of these armaments, not only against their very use, but against all warfare as a means of solving international conflicts."[121]  secondnameplaceholder himself acknowledged his wife Ava's deep involvement in peace work, and regretted that she was not awarded the Nobel Peace Prize with him.[122]Many of secondnameplaceholder's critics, including scientists who appreciated the contributions that he had made in chemistry, disagreed with his political positions and saw him as a naïve spokesman for Soviet communism. In 1960, he was ordered to appear before the Senate Internal Security Subcommittee,[123] which termed him "the number one scientific name in virtually every major activity of the Communist peace offensive in this country."[124] A headline in Life magazine characterized his 1962 Nobel Prize as "A Weird Insult from Norway".[125][126]secondnameplaceholder was a frequent target of the National Review magazine. In an article entitled "The Collaborators" in the magazine's July 17, 1962 issue, secondnameplaceholder was referred to not only as a collaborator, but as a "fellow traveler" of proponents of Soviet-style communism.  In 1965, secondnameplaceholder sued the magazine, its publisher William Rusher, and its editor William F. Buckley, Jr for $1 million. He lost both his libel suits and the 1968 appeal.[127][128][129][130]His peace activism, his frequent travels, and his enthusiastic expansion into chemical-biomedical research all aroused opposition at Caltech. In 1958, the Caltech Board of Trustees demanded that secondnameplaceholder step down as chairman of the Chemistry and Chemical Engineering Division.[79]:2  Although he had retained tenure as a full professor, secondnameplaceholder chose to resign from Caltech after he received the Nobel peace prize money. He spent the next three years at the Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions (1963–1967).[22] In 1967, he moved to the University of California at San Diego, but remained there only briefly, leaving in 1969 in part because of political tensions with the Reagan-era board of regents.[79]:3  From 1969 to 1974, he accepted a position as Professor of Chemistry at Stanford University.[43]During the 1960s, President Lyndon Johnson's policy of increasing America's involvement in the Vietnam War caused an anti-war movement that the secondnameplaceholders joined with enthusiasm. secondnameplaceholder denounced the war as unnecessary and unconstitutional. He made speeches, signed protest letters and communicated personally with the North Vietnamese leader, Ho Chi Minh, and gave the lengthy written response to President Johnson. His efforts were ignored by the American government.[131]secondnameplaceholder was awarded the International Lenin Peace Prize by the USSR in 1970.[124][132]  He continued his peace activism in the following years.  He and his wife Ava helped to found the International League of Humanists in 1974.[133] He was president of the scientific advisory board of the World Union for Protection of Life and also one of the signatories of the Dubrovnik-Philadelphia Statement of 1974/1976.[134] firstnameplaceholder Carl secondnameplaceholder was an honorary president and member of the International Academy of Science, Munich until the end of his life.[135]secondnameplaceholder supported a limited form of eugenics by suggesting that human carriers of defective genes be given a compulsory visible mark – such as a forehead tattoo – to discourage potential mates with the same defect, in order to reduce the number of babies with diseases such as sickle cell anemia.[136][137]In 1941, at age 40, secondnameplaceholder was diagnosed with Bright's disease, a renal disease. Following the recommendations of Thomas Addis, who actively recruited Ava Helen secondnameplaceholder as "nutritionist, cook, and eventually as deputy 'doctor'", secondnameplaceholder believed he was able to control the disease with Addis's then-unusual low-protein salt-free diet and vitamin supplements.[139] Thus secondnameplaceholder's initial – and intensely personal – exposure to the idea of treating disease with vitamin supplements was positive.In 1965, secondnameplaceholder read Niacin Therapy in Psychiatry by Abram Hoffer and theorized vitamins might have important biochemical effects unrelated to their prevention of associated deficiency diseases.[140] In 1968, secondnameplaceholder published a brief paper in Science entitled "Orthomolecular psychiatry",[141] giving a name to the popular but controversial megavitamin therapy movement of the 1970s, and advocating that "orthomolecular therapy, the provision for the individual person of the optimum concentrations of important normal constituents of the brain, may be the preferred treatment for many mentally ill patients." secondnameplaceholder coined the term "orthomolecular" to refer to the practice of varying the concentration of substances normally present in the body to prevent and treat disease. His ideas formed the basis of orthomolecular medicine, which is not generally practiced by conventional medical professionals and has been strongly criticized.[142][143]In 1973, with Arthur B. Robinson and another colleague, secondnameplaceholder founded the Institute of Orthomolecular Medicine in Menlo Park, California, which was soon renamed the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Institute of Science and Medicine. secondnameplaceholder directed research on vitamin C, but also continued his theoretical work in chemistry and physics until his death. In his last years, he became especially interested in the possible role of vitamin C in preventing atherosclerosis and published three case reports on the use of lysine and vitamin C to relieve angina pectoris. During the 1990s, secondnameplaceholder put forward a comprehensive plan for the treatment of heart disease using lysine and vitamin C. In 1996, a website was created expounding secondnameplaceholder's treatment which it referred to as secondnameplaceholder Therapy. Proponents of secondnameplaceholder Therapy believe that  heart disease can be treated and even cured using only lysine and Vitamin C and without drugs or heart operations.[144]secondnameplaceholder's work on vitamin C in his later years generated much controversy. He was first introduced to the concept of high-dose vitamin C by biochemist Irwin Stone in 1966. After becoming convinced of its worth, secondnameplaceholder took 3 grams of vitamin C every day to prevent colds.[14] Excited by his own perceived results, he researched the clinical literature and published Vitamin C and the Common Cold in 1970. He began a long clinical collaboration with the British cancer surgeon Ewan Cameron in 1971 on the use of intravenous and oral vitamin C as cancer therapy for terminal patients.[145] Cameron and secondnameplaceholder wrote many technical papers and a popular book, Cancer and Vitamin C, that discussed their observations. secondnameplaceholder made vitamin C popular with the public[146] and eventually published two studies of a group of 100 allegedly terminal patients that claimed vitamin C increased survival by as much as four times compared to untreated patients.[147][148]A re-evaluation of the claims in 1982 found that the patient groups were not actually comparable, with the vitamin C group being less sick on entry to the study, and judged to be "terminal" much earlier than the comparison group.[149] Later clinical trials conducted by the Mayo Clinic also concluded that high-dose (10,000 mg) vitamin C was no better than placebo at treating cancer and that there was no benefit to high-dose vitamin C.[150][151][152] The failure of the clinical trials to demonstrate any benefit resulted in the conclusion that vitamin C was not effective in treating cancer; the medical establishment concluded that his claims that vitamin C could prevent colds or treat cancer were quackery.[14][153] secondnameplaceholder denounced the conclusions of these studies and handling of the final study as "fraud and deliberate misrepresentation",[154][155] and criticized the studies for using oral, rather than intravenous vitamin C[156] (which was the dosing method used for the first ten days of secondnameplaceholder's original study[153]). secondnameplaceholder also criticised the Mayo clinic studies because the controls were taking vitamin C during the trial, and because the duration of the treatment with vitamin C was short; secondnameplaceholder advocated continued high-dose vitamin C for the rest of the cancer patient's life whereas the Mayo clinic patients in the second trial were treated with vitamin C for a median of 2.5 months.[157] The results were publicly debated at length with considerable acrimony between secondnameplaceholder and Cameron, and Moertel (the lead author of the Mayo Clinic studies), with accusations of misconduct and scientific incompetence on both sides.[citation needed]Ultimately the negative findings of the Mayo Clinic studies ended general interest in vitamin C as a treatment for cancer.[155] Despite this, secondnameplaceholder continued to promote vitamin C for treating cancer and the common cold, working with The Institutes for the Achievement of Human Potential to use vitamin C in the treatment of brain-injured children.[158] He later collaborated with the Canadian physician Abram Hoffer on a micronutrient regime, including high-dose vitamin C, as adjunctive cancer therapy.[159] A 2009 review also noted differences between the studies, such as the Mayo clinic not using intravenous Vitamin C, and suggested further studies into the role of vitamin C when given intravenously.[160]  Results from most clinical trials suggest that modest vitamin C supplementation alone or with other nutrients offers no benefit in the prevention of cancer.[161][162]
<h2>Personal life</h2>
secondnameplaceholder married Ava Helen Miller on June 17, 1923. The marriage lasted until Ava secondnameplaceholder's death in 1981. They had four children.[163] firstnameplaceholder Carl Jr. (born 1925) became a psychiatrist; Peter (1931–2003) a crystallographer at University College London; Edward Crellin (1937–1997) a biologist; and Linda Helen (born 1932) married noted Caltech geologist and glaciologist Barclay Kamb.[164]secondnameplaceholder was raised as a member of the Lutheran Church,[165] but later joined the Unitarian Universalist Church.[166] Two years before his death, in a published dialogue with Buddhist philosopher Daisaku Ikeda, secondnameplaceholder publicly declared his atheism.[167]On January 30, 1960, secondnameplaceholder and his wife were using a cabin about 80 miles (130 km) south of Monterey, California, and he decided to go for a walk on a coastal trail.  He got lost and tried to climb the rocky cliff, but reached a large overhanging rock about 300 feet (90 m) above the ocean.  He decided it was safest to stay there, and meanwhile he was reported missing.  He spent a sleepless night on the cliff before being found after almost 24 hours.[168]secondnameplaceholder died of prostate cancer on August 19, 1994, at 19:20 at home in Big Sur, California.[13] He was 93 years old.[169] A grave marker for secondnameplaceholder was placed in Oswego Pioneer Cemetery in Lake Oswego, Oregon by his sister Pauline, but secondnameplaceholder's ashes, along with those of his wife, were not buried there until 2005.[170]secondnameplaceholder's discoveries led to decisive contributions in a  diverse array of areas including around 350 publications in the fields of quantum mechanics, inorganic chemistry, organic chemistry, protein structure, molecular biology, and medicine.[171][172]His work on chemical bonding marks him as one of the founders of modern quantum chemistry.[10] The Nature of the Chemical Bond was the standard work for many years,[173] and concepts like hybridization and electronegativity remain part of standard chemistry textbooks. While his Valence bond approach fell short of accounting quantitatively for some of the characteristics of molecules, such as the color of organometallic complexes, and would later be eclipsed by the molecular orbital theory of Robert Mulliken, Valence Bond Theory still competes, in its modern form, with Molecular Orbital Theory and density functional theory (DFT) as a way of describing chemical phenomena.[174] secondnameplaceholder's work on crystal structure contributed significantly to the prediction and elucidation of the structures of complex minerals and compounds.[35]:80–81 His discovery of the alpha helix and beta sheet is a fundamental foundation for the study of protein structure.[70]Francis Crick acknowledged secondnameplaceholder as the "father of molecular biology".[10][175] His discovery of sickle cell anemia as a "molecular disease" opened the way toward examining genetically acquired mutations at a molecular level.[78]secondnameplaceholder's 1951 publication with Robert B. Corey and H. R. Branson, "The Structure of Proteins: Two Hydrogen-Bonded Helical Configurations of the Polypeptide Chain," was a key early finding in the then newly emerging field of molecular biology. This publication was honored by a Citation for Chemical Breakthrough Award from the Division of History of Chemistry of the American Chemical Society presented to the Department of Chemistry, Caltech, in 2017.[176][177]Oregon State University completed construction of the $77 million, 100,000-square-foot (9,300 m2) firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Science Center in the late 2000s, now housing the bulk of Oregon State's chemistry classrooms, labs, and instruments.[178]On March 6, 2008, the United States Postal Service released a 41 cent stamp honoring secondnameplaceholder designed by artist Victor Stabin.[179][180] His description reads: "A remarkably versatile scientist, structural chemist firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (1901–1994) won the 1954 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for determining the nature of the chemical bond linking atoms into molecules. His work in establishing the field of molecular biology; his studies of hemoglobin led to the classification of sickle cell anemia as a molecular disease."[78] The other scientists on this sheet of stamps included Gerty Cori, biochemist, Edwin Hubble, astronomer, and John Bardeen, physicist.[180]California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger and First Lady Maria Shriver announced on May 28, 2008 that secondnameplaceholder would be inducted into the California Hall of Fame, located at The California Museum for History, Women and the Arts. The induction ceremony took place December 15, 2008. secondnameplaceholder's son was asked to accept the honor in his place.[181]By proclamation of Gov. John Kitzhaber in the state of Oregon, February 28 has been named "firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Day".[182]  The firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Institute still exists, but moved in 1996 from Palo Alto, California, to Corvallis, Oregon, where it is part of the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Science Center at Oregon State University.[183][184][185] The Valley Library Special Collections at Oregon State University contain the Ava Helen and firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Papers, including digitized versions of secondnameplaceholder's forty-six research notebooks.[182]In 1986, Caltech commemorated firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder with a Symposium and Lectureship.[186] The secondnameplaceholder Lecture series at Caltech began in 1989 with a lecture by secondnameplaceholder himself.  The Caltech Chemistry Department renamed room 22 of Gates Hall the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Lecture Hall, since secondnameplaceholder spent so much time there.[187]Other places named after secondnameplaceholder include secondnameplaceholder Street in Foothill Ranch, California;[188] firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Drive in Hercules, California; firstnameplaceholder and Ava Helen secondnameplaceholder Hall at Soka University of America in Aliso Viejo, California;[189] firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Middle School in Corvallis, Oregon;[190] and secondnameplaceholder Field, a small airfield located in Condon, Oregon, where secondnameplaceholder spent his youth.[191]  There is a psychedelic rock band in Houston, Texas, named The firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Quartet.[192]The asteroid 4674 secondnameplaceholder in the inner asteroid belt, discovered by Eleanor F. Helin, was named after firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder in 1991, on his 90th birthday.[193]firstnameplaceholder Torvalds, developer of the Linux kernel, is named after secondnameplaceholder.[194]Nobel laureate Peter Agre has said that firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder inspired him.[195]In 2010, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory named its distinguished postdoctoral program in his honor, as the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Distinguished Postdoctoral Fellowship Program.
<h2>Honors and awards</h2>
secondnameplaceholder received numerous awards and honors during his career, including the following:[196][43][197]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (born Michael King Jr.; January 15, 1929 – April 4, 1968) was an American Baptist minister and activist who became the most visible spokesperson and leader in the American civil rights movement from 1955 until his assassination in 1968. King advanced civil rights through nonviolence and civil disobedience, inspired by his Christian beliefs and the nonviolent activism of Mahatma Gandhi. He was the son of early civil rights activist firstnameplaceholder Luther King Sr.King participated in and led marches for blacks' right to vote, desegregation, labor rights, and other basic civil rights.[1] King led the 1955 Montgomery bus boycott and later became the first president of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC). As president of the SCLC, he led the unsuccessful Albany Movement in Albany, Georgia, and helped organize some of the nonviolent 1963 protests in Birmingham, Alabama. King helped organize the 1963 March on Washington, where he delivered his famous "I Have a Dream" speech on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial.The SCLC put into practice the tactics of nonviolent protest with some success by strategically choosing the methods and places in which protests were carried out. There were several dramatic stand-offs with segregationist authorities, who sometimes turned violent.[2] FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover considered King a radical and made him an object of the FBI's COINTELPRO from 1963, forward. FBI agents investigated him for possible communist ties, recorded his extramarital affairs and reported on them to government officials, and, in 1964, mailed King a threatening anonymous letter, which he interpreted as an attempt to make him commit suicide.[3]On October 14, 1964, King won the Nobel Peace Prize for combating racial inequality through nonviolent resistance. In 1965, he helped organize two of the three Selma to Montgomery marches. In his final years, he expanded his focus to include opposition towards poverty, capitalism, and the Vietnam War.In 1968, King was planning a national occupation of Washington, D.C., to be called the Poor People's Campaign, when he was assassinated on April 4 in Memphis, Tennessee. His death was followed by riots in many U.S. cities. Allegations that James Earl Ray, the man convicted of killing King, had been framed or acted in concert with government agents persisted for decades after the shooting. King was posthumously awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1977 and the Congressional Gold Medal in 2003. firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Day was established as a holiday in cities and states throughout the United States beginning in 1971; the holiday was enacted at the federal level by legislation signed by President Ronald Reagan in 1986. Hundreds of streets in the U.S. have been renamed in his honor, and the most populous county in Washington State was rededicated for him. The firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Memorial on the National Mall in Washington, D.C., was dedicated in 2011.firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (born Michael King Jr.; January 15, 1929 – April 4, 1968) was an American Baptist minister and activist who became the most visible spokesperson and leader in the American civil rights movement from 1955 until his assassination in 1968. King advanced civil rights through nonviolence and civil disobedience, inspired by his Christian beliefs and the nonviolent activism of Mahatma Gandhi. He was the son of early civil rights activist firstnameplaceholder Luther King Sr.King participated in and led marches for blacks' right to vote, desegregation, labor rights, and other basic civil rights.[1] King led the 1955 Montgomery bus boycott and later became the first president of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC). As president of the SCLC, he led the unsuccessful Albany Movement in Albany, Georgia, and helped organize some of the nonviolent 1963 protests in Birmingham, Alabama. King helped organize the 1963 March on Washington, where he delivered his famous "I Have a Dream" speech on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial.The SCLC put into practice the tactics of nonviolent protest with some success by strategically choosing the methods and places in which protests were carried out. There were several dramatic stand-offs with segregationist authorities, who sometimes turned violent.[2] FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover considered King a radical and made him an object of the FBI's COINTELPRO from 1963, forward. FBI agents investigated him for possible communist ties, recorded his extramarital affairs and reported on them to government officials, and, in 1964, mailed King a threatening anonymous letter, which he interpreted as an attempt to make him commit suicide.[3]On October 14, 1964, King won the Nobel Peace Prize for combating racial inequality through nonviolent resistance. In 1965, he helped organize two of the three Selma to Montgomery marches. In his final years, he expanded his focus to include opposition towards poverty, capitalism, and the Vietnam War.In 1968, King was planning a national occupation of Washington, D.C., to be called the Poor People's Campaign, when he was assassinated on April 4 in Memphis, Tennessee. His death was followed by riots in many U.S. cities. Allegations that James Earl Ray, the man convicted of killing King, had been framed or acted in concert with government agents persisted for decades after the shooting. King was posthumously awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1977 and the Congressional Gold Medal in 2003. firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Day was established as a holiday in cities and states throughout the United States beginning in 1971; the holiday was enacted at the federal level by legislation signed by President Ronald Reagan in 1986. Hundreds of streets in the U.S. have been renamed in his honor, and the most populous county in Washington State was rededicated for him. The firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Memorial on the National Mall in Washington, D.C., was dedicated in 2011.firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder[320] was canonized[321] by Archbishop Timothy Paul of the Holy Christian Orthodox Church[322] (not in communion with the Eastern Orthodox Church)[323] on 9 September 2016[324] in the Christian Cathedral in Springfield, Massachusetts,[325] his feast day is April 4, the date of his assassination. King is honored[326] with a Lesser Feast on the liturgical calendar of the Episcopal Church in the United States of America[327] on April 4[328] or January 15.[329] The Evangelical Lutheran Church in America commemorates King liturgically on the anniversary of his birth, January 15.[330]
<h2>Early life and education</h2>
King was born Michael King Jr. on January 15, 1929, in Atlanta, Georgia, the second of three children to Michael King and Alberta King (née Williams).[4][5][6] King's mother named him Michael, which was entered onto the birth certificate by the attending physician.[7] King's older sister is Christine King Farris and his younger brother was Alfred Daniel "A.D." King.[8] King's maternal grandfather Adam Daniel Williams,[9] who was a minister in rural Georgia, moved to Atlanta in 1893,[6] and became pastor of the Ebenezer Baptist Church in the following year.[10] Williams was of African-Irish descent.[11][12][13] Williams married Jennie Celeste Parks, who gave birth to King's mother, Alberta.[6] King's father was born to sharecroppers, James Albert and Delia King of Stockbridge, Georgia.[5][6] In his adolescent years, King Sr. left his parents' farm and walked to Atlanta where he attained a high school education.[14][15][16] King Sr. then enrolled in Morehouse College and studied to enter the ministry.[16] King Sr. and Alberta began dating in 1920, and married on November 25, 1926.[17][18] Until Jennie's death in 1941, they lived together on the second floor of her parent's two-story Victorian house, where King was born.[7][17][18][19]Shortly after marrying Alberta, King Sr. became assistant pastor of the Ebenezer Baptist Church.[18] Adam Daniel Williams died of a stroke in the spring of 1931.[18] That fall, King's father took over the role of pastor at the church, where he would in time raise the attendance from six hundred to several thousand.[18][6] In 1934, the church sent King Sr. on a multinational trip to Rome, Tunisia, Egypt, Jerusalem, Bethlehem, then Berlin for the meeting of the Baptist World Alliance (BWA).[20] The trip ended with visits to sites in Berlin associated with the Reformation leader, firstnameplaceholder Luther.[20] While there, Michael King Sr. witnessed the rise of Nazism.[20] In reaction, the BWA conference issued a resolution which stated, "This Congress deplores and condemns as a violation of the law of God the Heavenly Father, all racial animosity, and every form of oppression or unfair discrimination toward the Jews, toward coloured people, or toward subject races in any part of the world."[21] He returned home in August 1934, and in that same year began referring to himself as firstnameplaceholder Luther King, and his son as firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder[20][22][17] King's birth certificate was altered to read "firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder" on July 23, 1957, when he was 28 years old.[20][21][23]At his childhood home, King and his two siblings would read aloud the Bible as instructed by their father.[24] After dinners there, King's grandmother Jennie, who he affectionately referred to as "Mama", would tell lively stories from the Bible to her grandchildren.[24] King's father would regularly use whippings to discipline his children.[25] At times, King Sr. would also have his children whip each other.[25] King's father later remarked, "[King] was the most peculiar child whenever you whipped him. He'd stand there, and the tears would run down, and he'd never cry."[26] Once when King witnessed his brother A.D. emotionally upset his sister Christine, he took a telephone and knocked out A.D. with it.[25][27] When he and his brother were playing at their home, A.D. slid from a banister and hit into their grandmother, Jennie, causing her to fall down unresponsive.[28][27] King, believing her dead, blamed himself and attempted suicide by jumping from a second-story window.[29][27] Upon hearing that his grandmother was alive, King rose and left the ground where he had fallen.[29]King became friends with a white boy whose father owned a business across the street from his family's home.[30] In September 1935, when the boys were about six years old, they started school.[30][31] King had to attend a school for black children, Younge Street Elementary School,[30][32] while his close playmate went to a separate school for white children only.[30][32] Soon afterwards, the parents of the white boy stopped allowing King to play with their son, stating to him "we are white, and you are colored".[30][33] When King relayed the happenings to his parents, they had a long discussion with him about the history of slavery and racism in America.[30][34] Upon learning of the hatred, violence and oppression that black people had faced in the U.S., King would later state that he was "determined to hate every white person".[30] His parents instructed him that it was his Christian duty to love everyone.[34]King witnessed his father stand up against segregation and various forms of discrimination.[35] Once, when stopped by a police officer who referred to King Sr. as "boy", King's father responded sharply that King was a boy but he was a man.[35] When King's father took him into a shoe store in downtown Atlanta, the clerk told them they needed to sit in the back.[36] King's father refused, stating "we'll either buy shoes sitting here or we won't buy any shoes at all", before taking King and leaving the store.[15] He told King afterward, "I don't care how long I have to live with this system, I will never accept it."[15] In 1936, King's father led hundreds of African Americans in a civil rights march to the city hall in Atlanta, to protest voting rights discrimination.[25] King later remarked that King Sr. was "a real father" to him.[37]King memorized and sang hymns, and stated verses from the Bible, by the time he was five years old.[29] Over the next year, he began to go to church events with his mother and sing hymns while she played piano.[29] His favorite hymn to sing was "I Want to Be More and More Like Jesus"; he moved attendees with his singing.[29] King later became a member of the junior choir in his church.[38] King enjoyed opera, and played the piano.[39] As he grew up, King garnered a large vocabulary from reading dictionaries and consistently used his expanding lexicon.[27] He got into physical altercations with boys in his neighborhood, but oftentimes used his knowledge of words to stymie fights.[27][39] King showed a lack of interest in grammar and spelling, a trait which he carried throughout his life.[39] In 1939, King sang as a member of his church choir in slave costume, for the all-white audience at the Atlanta premiere of the film Gone with the Wind.[40][41] In September 1940, at the age of 12, King was enrolled at the Atlanta University Laboratory School for the seventh grade.[42][43] While there, King took violin and piano lessons, and showed keen interest in his history and English classes.[42]On May 18, 1941, when King had snuck away from studying at home to watch a parade, King was informed that something had happened to his maternal grandmother.[37] Upon returning home, he found out that she had suffered a heart attack and died while being transported to a hospital.[19] He took the death very hard and believed that his deception of going to see the parade may have been responsible for God taking her.[19] King jumped out of a second-story window at his home, but again survived an attempt to kill himself.[19][26][27] His father instructed him in his bedroom that King shouldn't blame himself for her death, and that she had been called home to God as part of God's plan which could not be changed.[19][44] King struggled with this, and could not fully believe that his parents knew where his grandmother had gone.[19] Shortly thereafter, King's father decided to move the family to a two-story brick home on a hill that overlooked downtown Atlanta.[19]In his adolescent years, he initially felt resentment against whites due to the "racial humiliation" that he, his family, and his neighbors often had to endure in the segregated South.[45] In 1942, when King was 13 years old, he became the youngest assistant manager of a newspaper delivery station for the Atlanta Journal.[46] That year, King skipped the ninth grade and was enrolled in Booker T. Washington High School, where he maintained a B-plus average.[44][47] The high school was the only one in the city for African-American students.[18] It had been formed after local black leaders, including King's grandfather (Williams), urged the city government of Atlanta to create it.[18]While King was brought up in a Baptist home, King grew skeptical of some of Christianity's claims as he entered adolescence.[48] He began to question the literalist teachings preached at his father's church.[49] At the age of 13, he denied the bodily resurrection of Jesus during Sunday school.[50][49] King has stated, he found himself unable to identify with the emotional displays and gestures from congregants frequent at his church, and doubted if he would ever attain personal satisfaction from religion.[51][49] He later stated of this point in his life, "doubts began to spring forth unrelentingly."[52][50][49]In high school, King became known for his public-speaking ability, with a voice which had grown into an orotund baritone.[53][47] He proceeded to join the school's debate team.[53][47] King continued to be most drawn to history and English,[47] and choose English and sociology to be his main subjects while at the school.[54] King maintained an abundant vocabulary.[47] But, he relied on his sister, Christine, to help him with his spelling, while King assisted her with math.[47] They studied in this manner routinely until Christine's graduation from high school.[47] King also developed an interest in fashion, commonly adorning himself in well polished patent leather shoes and tweed suits, which gained him the nickname "Tweed" or "Tweedie" among his friends.[55][56][57][58] He further grew a liking for flirting with girls and dancing.[57][56][59] His brother A. D. later remarked, "He kept flitting from chick to chick, and I decided I couldn't keep up with him. Especially since he was crazy about dances, and just about the best jitterbug in town."[56]On April 13, 1944, in his junior year, King gave his first public speech during an oratorical contest, sponsored by the Improved Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks of the World in Dublin, Georgia.[60][56][61][62] In his speech he stated, "black America still wears chains. The finest negro is at the mercy of the meanest white man. Even winners of our highest honors face the class color bar."[63][60] King was selected as the winner of the contest.[60][56] On the ride home to Atlanta by bus, he and his teacher were ordered by the driver to stand so that white passengers could sit down.[56][64] The driver of the bus called King a "black son-of-a-bitch".[56] King initially refused but complied after his teacher told him that he would be breaking the law if he did not follow the directions of the driver.[64] As all the seats were occupied, he and his teacher were forced to stand on the rest of the drive back to Atlanta.[56] Later King wrote of the incident, saying "That night will never leave my memory. It was the angriest I have ever been in my life."[64]During King's junior year in high school, Morehouse College—an all-male historically black college which King's father and maternal grandfather had attended[65][66]—began accepting high school juniors who passed the school's entrance examination.[56][67][64] As World War II was underway many black college students had been enlisted in the war, decreasing the numbers of students at Morehouse College.[56][67] So, the university aimed to increase their student numbers by allowing junior high school students to apply.[56][67][64] In 1944, at the age of 15, King passed the entrance examination and was enrolled at the university for the school season that autumn.[a][56][67][65][68]In the summer before King started his freshman year at Morehouse, he boarded a train with his friend—Emmett "Weasel" Proctor—and a group of other Morehouse College students to work in Simsbury, Connecticut at the tobacco farm of Cullman Brothers Tobacco (a cigar business).[69][70] This was King's first trip outside of the segregated south into the integrated north.[71][72] In a June 1944 letter to his father King wrote about the differences that struck him between the two parts of the country, "On our way here we saw some things I had never anticipated to see. After we passed Washington there was no discrimination at all. The white people here are very nice. We go to any place we want to and sit any where we want to."[71] The students worked at the farm to be able to provide for their educational costs at Morehouse College, as the farm had partnered with the college to allot their salaries towards the university's tuition, housing, and other fees.[69][70] On weekdays King and the other students worked in the fields, picking tobacco from 7:00am till at least 5:00pm, enduring temperatures above 100°F, to earn roughly USD$4 per day.[70][71] On Friday evenings, King and the other students visited downtown Simsbury to get milkshakes and watch movies, and on Saturdays they would travel to Hartford, Connecticut to see theatre performances, shop and eat in restaurants.[70][72] While each Sunday they would go to Hartford to attend church services, at a church filled with white congregants.[70] King wrote to his parents about the lack of segregation in Connecticut, relaying how he was amazed they could go to the "one of the finest restaurants in Hartford" and that "Negroes and whites go to the same church".[70][73][71]He played freshman football there. The summer before his last year at Morehouse, in 1947, the 18-year-old King chose to enter the ministry. Throughout his time in college, King studied under the mentorship of its president, Baptist minister Benjamin Mays, who he would later credit with being his "spiritual mentor."[74] King had concluded that the church offered the most assuring way to answer "an inner urge to serve humanity." His "inner urge" had begun developing, and he made peace with the Baptist Church, as he believed he would be a "rational" minister with sermons that were "a respectful force for ideas, even social protest."[75] King graduated from Morehouse with a Bachelor of Arts (BA) in sociology in 1948, aged nineteen.[76]
<h2>Religious education, ministry, marriage and family</h2>
King enrolled in Crozer Theological Seminary in Upland, Pennsylvania.[77][78] King's father fully supported his decision to continue his education and made arrangements for King to work with J. Pius Barbour, a family friend who pastored at Calvary Baptist Church in nearby Chester, Pennsylvania.[79] King became known as one of the "Sons of Calvary", an honor he shared with William Augustus Jones Jr. and Samuel D. Proctor who both went on to become well-known preachers in the black church.[80]While attending Crozer, King was joined by Walter McCall, a former classmate at Morehouse.[81] At Crozer, King was elected president of the student body.[82] The African-American students of Crozer for the most part conducted their social activity on Edwards Street. King became fond of the street because a classmate had an aunt who prepared collard greens for them, which they both relished.[83]King once reproved another student for keeping beer in his room, saying they had shared responsibility as African Americans to bear "the burdens of the Negro race." For a time, he was interested in Walter Rauschenbusch's "social gospel."[82] In his third year at Crozer, King became romantically involved with the white daughter of an immigrant German woman who worked as a cook in the cafeteria. The woman had been involved with a professor prior to her relationship with King. King planned to marry her, but friends advised against it, saying that an interracial marriage would provoke animosity from both blacks and whites, potentially damaging his chances of ever pastoring a church in the South. King tearfully told a friend that he could not endure his mother's pain over the marriage and broke the relationship off six months later. He continued to have lingering feelings toward the woman he left; one friend was quoted as saying, "He never recovered."[82] King graduated with a B.Div. degree in 1951.[77]In 1951, King began doctoral studies in systematic theology at Boston University.[84] While pursuing doctoral studies, King worked as an assistant minister at Boston's historic Twelfth Baptist Church with William Hunter Hester. Hester was an old friend of King's father and was an important influence on King.[85] In Boston, King befriended a small cadre of local ministers his age, and sometimes guest pastored at their churches, including the Reverend Michael Haynes, associate pastor at Twelfth Baptist Church in Roxbury (and younger brother of jazz drummer Roy Haynes). The young men often held bull sessions in their various apartments, discussing theology, sermon style, and social issues.King attended philosophy classes at Harvard University as an audit student in 1952 and 1953.[86]At the age of 25 in 1954, King was called as pastor of the Dexter Avenue Baptist Church in Montgomery, Alabama.[87] King received his Ph.D. degree on June 5, 1955, with a dissertation (initially supervised by Edgar S. Brightman and, upon the latter's death, by Lotan Harold DeWolf) titled A Comparison of the Conceptions of God in the Thinking of Paul Tillich and Henry Nelson Wieman.[88][84]An academic inquiry in October 1991 concluded that portions of his doctoral dissertation had been plagiarized and he had acted improperly. However, "[d]espite its finding, the committee said that 'no thought should be given to the revocation of Dr. King's doctoral degree,' an action that the panel said would serve no purpose."[89][84][90] The committee found that the dissertation still "makes an intelligent contribution to scholarship." A letter is now attached to the copy of King's dissertation held in the university library, noting that numerous passages were included without the appropriate quotations and citations of sources.[91] Significant debate exists on how to interpret King's plagiarism.[92]While studying at Boston University, he asked a friend from Atlanta named Mary Powell, who was a student at the New England Conservatory of Music, if she knew any nice Southern girls. Powell asked fellow student Coretta Scott if she was interested in meeting a Southern friend studying divinity. Scott was not interested in dating preachers but eventually agreed to allow firstnameplaceholder to telephone her based on Powell's description and vouching. On their first phone call, King told Scott "I am like Napoleon at Waterloo before your charms," to which she replied, "You haven't even met me." They went out for dates in his green Chevy. After the second date, King was certain Scott possessed the qualities he sought in a wife. She had been an activist at Antioch in undergrad, where Carol and Rod Serling were schoolmates.King married Coretta Scott on June 18, 1953, on the lawn of her parents' house in her hometown of Heiberger, Alabama.[93] They became the parents of four children: Yolanda King (1955–2007), firstnameplaceholder Luther King III (b. 1957), Dexter Scott King (b. 1961), and Bernice King (b. 1963).[94] During their marriage, King limited Coretta's role in the civil rights movement, expecting her to be a housewife and mother.[95]In December 1959, after being based in Montgomery for five years, King announced his return to Atlanta at the request of the SCLC.[96] In Atlanta, King served until his death as co-pastor with his father at the Ebenezer Baptist Church, and helped expand the Civil Rights Movement across the South.
<h2>Activism and organizational leadership</h2>
In March 1955, Claudette Colvin—a fifteen-year-old black schoolgirl in Montgomery—refused to give up her bus seat to a white man in violation of Jim Crow laws, local laws in the Southern United States that enforced racial segregation. King was on the committee from the Birmingham African-American community that looked into the case; E. D. Nixon and Clifford Durr decided to wait for a better case to pursue because the incident involved a minor.[97]Nine months later on December 1, 1955, a similar incident occurred when Rosa Parks was arrested for refusing to give up her seat on a city bus.[98] The two incidents led to the Montgomery bus boycott, which was urged and planned by Nixon and led by King.[99] King was in his twenties, and had just taken up his clerical role. The other ministers asked him to take a leadership role simply because his relative newness to community leadership made it easier for him to speak out. King was hesitant about taking the role, but decided to do so if no one else wanted the role.[100]The boycott lasted for 385 days,[101] and the situation became so tense that King's house was bombed.[102] King was arrested and jailed during this campaign, which overnight drew the attention of national media, and greatly increased King's public stature. The controversy ended when the United States District Court issued a ruling in Browder v. Gayle that prohibited racial segregation on all Montgomery public buses.[103] Blacks resumed riding the buses again, and were able to sit in the front with full legal authorization. [1] [100]King's role in the bus boycott transformed him into a national figure and the best-known spokesman of the civil rights movement.[104]In 1957, King, Ralph Abernathy, Fred Shuttlesworth, Joseph Lowery, and other civil rights activists founded the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC). The group was created to harness the moral authority and organizing power of black churches to conduct nonviolent protests in the service of civil rights reform. The group was inspired by the crusades of evangelist Billy Graham, who befriended King,[105] as well as the national organizing of the group In Friendship, founded by King allies Stanley Levison and Ella Baker.[106] King led the SCLC until his death.[107] The SCLC's 1957 Prayer Pilgrimage for Freedom was the first time King addressed a national audience.[108] Other civil rights leaders involved in the SCLC with King included: James Bevel, Allen Johnson, Curtis W. Harris, Walter E. Fauntroy, C. T. Vivian, Andrew Young, The Freedom Singers, Cleveland Robinson, Randolph Blackwell, Annie Bell Robinson Devine, Charles Kenzie Steele, Alfred Daniel Williams King, Benjamin Hooks, Aaron Henry and Bayard Rustin.[109]Harry Wachtel joined King's legal advisor Clarence B. Jones in defending four ministers of the SCLC in the libel case New York Times Co. v. Sullivan; the case was litigated in reference to the newspaper advertisement "Heed Their Rising Voices". Wachtel founded a tax-exempt fund to cover the suit's expenses and assist the nonviolent civil rights movement through a more effective means of fundraising. This organization was named the "Gandhi Society for Human Rights." King served as honorary president for the group. He was displeased with the pace that President Kennedy was using to address the issue of segregation. In 1962, King and the Gandhi Society produced a document that called on the President to follow in the footsteps of Abraham Lincoln and issue an executive order to deliver a blow for civil rights as a kind of Second Emancipation Proclamation. Kennedy did not execute the order.[110]The FBI was under written directive from Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy when it began tapping King's telephone line in the fall of 1963.[111] Kennedy was concerned that public allegations of communists in the SCLC would derail the administration's civil rights initiatives. He warned King to discontinue these associations and later felt compelled to issue the written directive that authorized the FBI to wiretap King and other SCLC leaders.[112] FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover feared the civil rights movement and investigated the allegations of communist infiltration. When no evidence emerged to support this, the FBI used the incidental details caught on tape over the next five years in attempts to force King out of his leadership position in the COINTELPRO program.[3]King believed that organized, nonviolent protest against the system of southern segregation known as Jim Crow laws would lead to extensive media coverage of the struggle for black equality and voting rights. Journalistic accounts and televised footage of the daily deprivation and indignities suffered by southern blacks, and of segregationist violence and harassment of civil rights workers and marchers, produced a wave of sympathetic public opinion that convinced the majority of Americans that the civil rights movement was the most important issue in American politics in the early 1960s.[113][114]King organized and led marches for blacks' right to vote, desegregation, labor rights, and other basic civil rights.[1] Most of these rights were successfully enacted into the law of the United States with the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the 1965 Voting Rights Act.[115][116]The SCLC put into practice the tactics of nonviolent protest with great success by strategically choosing the methods and places in which protests were carried out. There were often dramatic stand-offs with segregationist authorities, who sometimes turned violent.[2]On September 20, 1958, King was signing copies of his book Stride Toward Freedom in Blumstein's department store in Harlem [117] when he narrowly escaped death. Izola Curry—a mentally ill black woman who thought that King was conspiring against her with communists—stabbed him in the chest with a letter opener, which nearly impinged on the aorta. King received first aid by police officers Al Howard and Philip Romano.[118] King underwent emergency surgery with three doctors: Aubre de Lambert Maynard, Emil Naclerio and John W. V. Cordice; he remained hospitalized for several weeks. Curry was later found mentally incompetent to stand trial.[119][120]Georgia governor Ernest Vandiver expressed open hostility towards King's return to his hometown in late 1959. He claimed that "wherever M. L. King, Jr., has been there has followed in his wake a wave of crimes", and vowed to keep King under surveillance.[121] On May 4, 1960, several months after his return, King drove writer Lillian Smith to Emory University when police stopped them. King was cited for "driving without a license" because he had not yet been issued a Georgia license. King's Alabama license was still valid, and Georgia law did not mandate any time limit for issuing a local license.[122] King paid a fine but was apparently unaware that his lawyer agreed to a plea deal that also included a probationary sentence.Meanwhile, the Atlanta Student Movement had been acting to desegregate businesses and public spaces in the city, organizing the Atlanta sit-ins from March 1960 onwards. In August the movement asked King to participate in a mass October sit-in, timed to highlight how 1960's Presidential election campaign had ignored civil rights. The coordinated day of action took place on October 19. King participated in a sit-in at the restaurant inside Rich's, Atlanta's largest department store, and was among the many arrested that day. The authorities released everyone over the next few days, except for King. Invoking his probationary plea deal, judge J. Oscar Mitchell sentenced King on October 25 to four months of hard labor. Before dawn the next day, King was taken from his county jail cell and transported to a maximum-security state prison.[where?][123]The arrest and harsh sentence drew nationwide attention. Many feared for King's safety, as he started a prison sentence with people convicted of violent crimes, many of them White and hostile to his activism.[124] Both Presidential candidates were asked to weigh in, at a time when both parties were courting the support of Southern Whites and their political leadership including Governor Vandiver. Nixon, with whom King had a closer relationship prior to the sit-in, declined to make a statement despite a personal visit from Jackie Robinson requesting his intervention. Nixon's opponent John F. Kennedy called the governor (a Democrat) directly, enlisted his brother Robert to exert more pressure on state authorities, and also, at the personal request of Sargent Shriver, made a phone call to King's wife to express his sympathy and offer his help. The pressure from Kennedy and others proved effective, and King was released two days later. King's father decided to openly endorse Kennedy's candidacy for the November 8 election which he narrowly won.[125]After the October 19 sit-ins and following unrest, a 30-day truce was declared in Atlanta for desegregation negotiations. However, the negotiations failed and sit-ins and boycotts resumed in full swing for several months. On March 7, 1961, a group of Black elders including King notified student leaders that a deal had been reached: the city's lunch counters would desegregate in fall 1961, in conjunction with the court-mandated desegregation of schools.[126][127] Many students were disappointed at the compromise. In a large meeting March 10 at Warren Memorial Methodist Church, the audience was hostile and frustrated towards the elders and the compromise. King then gave an impassioned speech calling participants to resist the "cancerous disease of disunity," and helping to calm tensions.[128]The Albany Movement was a desegregation coalition formed in Albany, Georgia, in November 1961. In December, King and the SCLC became involved. The movement mobilized thousands of citizens for a broad-front nonviolent attack on every aspect of segregation within the city and attracted nationwide attention. When King first visited on December 15, 1961, he "had planned to stay a day or so and return home after giving counsel."[129] The following day he was swept up in a mass arrest of peaceful demonstrators, and he declined bail until the city made concessions. According to King, "that agreement was dishonored and violated by the city" after he left town.[129]King returned in July 1962 and was given the option of forty-five days in jail or a $178 fine (equivalent to $1,500 in 2020); he chose jail. Three days into his sentence, Police Chief Laurie Pritchett discreetly arranged for King's fine to be paid and ordered his release. "We had witnessed persons being kicked off lunch counter stools ... ejected from churches ... and thrown into jail ... But for the first time, we witnessed being kicked out of jail."[130] It was later acknowledged by the King Center that Billy Graham was the one who bailed King out of jail during this time.[131]After nearly a year of intense activism with few tangible results, the movement began to deteriorate. King requested a halt to all demonstrations and a "Day of Penance" to promote nonviolence and maintain the moral high ground. Divisions within the black community and the canny, low-key response by local government defeated efforts.[132] Though the Albany effort proved a key lesson in tactics for King and the national civil rights movement,[133] the national media was highly critical of King's role in the defeat, and the SCLC's lack of results contributed to a growing gulf between the organization and the more radical SNCC. After Albany, King sought to choose engagements for the SCLC in which he could control the circumstances, rather than entering into pre-existing situations.[134]In April 1963, the SCLC began a campaign against racial segregation and economic injustice in Birmingham, Alabama. The campaign used nonviolent but intentionally confrontational tactics, developed in part by Wyatt Tee Walker. Black people in Birmingham, organizing with the SCLC, occupied public spaces with marches and sit-ins, openly violating laws that they considered unjust.King's intent was to provoke mass arrests and "create a situation so crisis-packed that it will inevitably open the door to negotiation."[135] The campaign's early volunteers did not succeed in shutting down the city, or in drawing media attention to the police's actions. Over the concerns of an uncertain King, SCLC strategist James Bevel changed the course of the campaign by recruiting children and young adults to join in the demonstrations.[136] Newsweek called this strategy a Children's Crusade.[137][138]During the protests, the Birmingham Police Department, led by Eugene "Bull" Connor, used high-pressure water jets and police dogs against protesters, including children. Footage of the police response was broadcast on national television news and dominated the nation's attention, shocking many white Americans and consolidating black Americans behind the movement.[139] Not all of the demonstrators were peaceful, despite the avowed intentions of the SCLC. In some cases, bystanders attacked the police, who responded with force. King and the SCLC were criticized for putting children in harm's way. But the campaign was a success: Connor lost his job, the "Jim Crow" signs came down, and public places became more open to blacks. King's reputation improved immensely.[137]King was arrested and jailed early in the campaign—his 13th arrest[140] out of 29.[141] From his cell, he composed the now-famous "Letter from Birmingham Jail" that responds to calls on the movement to pursue legal channels for social change. King argues that the crisis of racism is too urgent, and the current system too entrenched: "We know through painful experience that freedom is never voluntarily given by the oppressor; it must be demanded by the oppressed."[142] He points out that the Boston Tea Party, a celebrated act of rebellion in the American colonies, was illegal civil disobedience, and that, conversely, "everything Adolf Hitler did in Germany was 'legal'."[142] Walter Reuther, president of the United Auto Workers, arranged for $160,000 to bail out King and his fellow protestors.[143]King, representing the SCLC, was among the leaders of the "Big Six" civil rights organizations who were instrumental in the organization of the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom, which took place on August 28, 1963. The other leaders and organizations comprising the Big Six were Roy Wilkins from the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People; Whitney Young, National Urban League; A. Philip Randolph, Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters; John Lewis, SNCC; and James L. Farmer Jr., of the Congress of Racial Equality.[144]Bayard Rustin's open homosexuality, support of socialism, and his former ties to the Communist Party USA caused many white and African-American leaders to demand King distance himself from Rustin,[145] which King agreed to do.[146] However, he did collaborate in the 1963 March on Washington, for which Rustin was the primary logistical and strategic organizer.[147][148] For King, this role was another which courted controversy, since he was one of the key figures who acceded to the wishes of United States President John F. Kennedy in changing the focus of the march.[149][150]Kennedy initially opposed the march outright, because he was concerned it would negatively impact the drive for passage of civil rights legislation. However, the organizers were firm that the march would proceed.[151] With the march going forward, the Kennedys decided it was important to work to ensure its success. President Kennedy was concerned the turnout would be less than 100,000. Therefore, he enlisted the aid of additional church leaders and Walter Reuther, president of the United Automobile Workers, to help mobilize demonstrators for the cause.[152]The march originally was conceived as an event to dramatize the desperate condition of blacks in the southern U.S. and an opportunity to place organizers' concerns and grievances squarely before the seat of power in the nation's capital. Organizers intended to denounce the federal government for its failure to safeguard the civil rights and physical safety of civil rights workers and blacks. The group acquiesced to presidential pressure and influence, and the event ultimately took on a far less strident tone.[153] As a result, some civil rights activists felt it presented an inaccurate, sanitized pageant of racial harmony; Malcolm X called it the "Farce on Washington", and the Nation of Islam forbade its members from attending the march.[153][154]The march made specific demands: an end to racial segregation in public schools; meaningful civil rights legislation, including a law prohibiting racial discrimination in employment; protection of civil rights workers from police brutality; a $2 minimum wage for all workers (equivalent to $17 in 2020); and self-government for Washington, D.C., then governed by congressional committee.[155][156][157] Despite tensions, the march was a resounding success.[158] More than a quarter of a million people of diverse ethnicities attended the event, sprawling from the steps of the Lincoln Memorial onto the National Mall and around the reflecting pool. At the time, it was the largest gathering of protesters in Washington, D.C.'s history.[158]King delivered a 17-minute speech, later known as "I Have a Dream". In the speech's most famous passage – in which he departed from his prepared text, possibly at the prompting of Mahalia Jackson, who shouted behind him, "Tell them about the dream!"[159][160] – King said:[161]"I Have a Dream" came to be regarded as one of the finest speeches in the history of American oratory.[162] The March, and especially King's speech, helped put civil rights at the top of the agenda of reformers in the United States and facilitated passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.[163][164]The original typewritten copy of the speech, including King's handwritten notes on it, was discovered in 1984 to be in the hands of George Raveling, the first African-American basketball coach of the University of Iowa. In 1963, Raveling, then 26 years old, was standing near the podium, and immediately after the oration, impulsively asked King if he could have his copy of the speech, and he got it.[165]In March 1964, King and the SCLC joined forces with Robert Hayling's then-controversial movement in St. Augustine, Florida. Hayling's group had been affiliated with the NAACP but was forced out of the organization for advocating armed self-defense alongside nonviolent tactics. However, the pacifist SCLC accepted them.[166][167] King and the SCLC worked to bring white Northern activists to St. Augustine, including a delegation of rabbis and the 72-year-old mother of the governor of Massachusetts, all of whom were arrested.[168][169] During June, the movement marched nightly through the city, "often facing counter demonstrations by the Klan, and provoking violence that garnered national media attention." Hundreds of the marchers were arrested and jailed. During the course of this movement, the Civil Rights Act of 1964 was passed.[170]On May 7, 1964, King spoke at Saint Francis College's "The Negro and the Quest for Identity," in Biddeford, Maine. This was a symposium that brought many civil rights leaders together such as Dorothy Day and Roy Wilkins.[171][172] King spoke about how "We must get rid of the idea of superior and inferior races," through nonviolent tactics.[173]On February 6, 1964, King delivered the inaugural speech of a lecture series initiated at the New School called "The American Race Crisis." No audio record of his speech has been found, but in August 2013, almost 50 years later, the school discovered an audiotape with 15 minutes of a question-and-answer session that followed King's address. In these remarks, King referred to a conversation he had recently had with Jawaharlal Nehru in which he compared the sad condition of many African Americans to that of India's untouchables.[174] In his March 18,1964 interview by Robert Penn Warren, King compared his activism to his father's, citing his training in non-violence as a key difference. He also discusses the next phase of the civil rights movement and integration.[175]In December 1964, King and the SCLC joined forces with the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) in Selma, Alabama, where the SNCC had been working on voter registration for several months.[176] A local judge issued an injunction that barred any gathering of three or more people affiliated with the SNCC, SCLC, DCVL, or any of 41 named civil rights leaders. This injunction temporarily halted civil rights activity until King defied it by speaking at Brown Chapel on January 2, 1965.[177] During the 1965 march to Montgomery, Alabama, violence by state police and others against the peaceful marchers resulted in much publicity, which made racism in Alabama visible nationwide.Acting on James Bevel's call for a march from Selma to Montgomery, Bevel and other SCLC members, in partial collaboration with SNCC, attempted to organize a march to the state's capital. The first attempt to march on March 7, 1965, at which King was not present, was aborted because of mob and police violence against the demonstrators. This day has become known as Bloody Sunday and was a major turning point in the effort to gain public support for the civil rights movement. It was the clearest demonstration up to that time of the dramatic potential of King and Bevel's nonviolence strategy. [52]On March 5, King met with officials in the Johnson Administration in order to request an injunction against any prosecution of the demonstrators. He did not attend the march due to church duties, but he later wrote, "If I had any idea that the state troopers would use the kind of brutality they did, I would have felt compelled to give up my church duties altogether to lead the line."[178] Footage of police brutality against the protesters was broadcast extensively and aroused national public outrage.[179]King next attempted to organize a march for March 9. The SCLC petitioned for an injunction in federal court against the State of Alabama; this was denied and the judge issued an order blocking the march until after a hearing. Nonetheless, King led marchers on March 9 to the Edmund Pettus Bridge in Selma, then held a short prayer session before turning the marchers around and asking them to disperse so as not to violate the court order. The unexpected ending of this second march aroused the surprise and anger of many within the local movement.[180] Meanwhile, on March 11 King cried at the news of Johnson supporting a voting rights bill on television in Marie Foster's living room.[181] The march finally went ahead fully on March 25, 1965.[182][183] At the conclusion of the march on the steps of the state capitol, King delivered a speech that became known as "How Long, Not Long." In it, King stated that equal rights for African Americans could not be far away, "because the arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends toward justice" and "you shall reap what you sow".[b][184][185][186]In 1966, after several successes in the south, King, Bevel, and others in the civil rights organizations took the movement to the North, with Chicago as their first destination. King and Ralph Abernathy, both from the middle class, moved into a building at 1550 S. Hamlin Avenue, in the slums of North Lawndale[187] on Chicago's West Side, as an educational experience and to demonstrate their support and empathy for the poor.[188]The SCLC formed a coalition with CCCO, Coordinating Council of Community Organizations, an organization founded by Albert Raby, and the combined organizations' efforts were fostered under the aegis of the Chicago Freedom Movement.[189]
During that spring, several white couple/black couple tests of real estate offices uncovered racial steering: discriminatory processing of housing requests by couples who were exact matches in income, background, number of children, and other attributes.[190] Several larger marches were planned and executed: in Bogan, Belmont Cragin, Jefferson Park, Evergreen Park (a suburb southwest of Chicago), Gage Park, Marquette Park, and others.[189][191][192]King later stated and Abernathy wrote that the movement received a worse reception in Chicago than in the South. Marches, especially the one through Marquette Park on August 5, 1966, were met by thrown bottles and screaming throngs. Rioting seemed very possible.[193][194] King's beliefs militated against his staging a violent event, and he negotiated an agreement with Mayor Richard J. Daley to cancel a march in order to avoid the violence that he feared would result.[195] King was hit by a brick during one march, but continued to lead marches in the face of personal danger.[196]When King and his allies returned to the South, they left Jesse Jackson, a seminary student who had previously joined the movement in the South, in charge of their organization.[197] Jackson continued their struggle for civil rights by organizing the Operation Breadbasket movement that targeted chain stores that did not deal fairly with blacks.[198]A 1967 CIA document declassified in 2017 downplayed King's role in the "black militant situation" in Chicago, with a source stating that King "sought at least constructive, positive projects."[199]King was long opposed to American involvement in the Vietnam War,[202] but at first avoided the topic in public speeches in order to avoid the interference with civil rights goals that criticism of President Johnson's policies might have created.[202] At the urging of SCLC's former Director of Direct Action and now the head of the Spring Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam, James Bevel, and inspired by the outspokenness of Muhammad Ali,[203] King eventually agreed to publicly oppose the war as opposition was growing among the American public.[202]During an April 4, 1967, appearance at the New York City Riverside Church—exactly one year before his death—King delivered a speech titled "Beyond Vietnam: A Time to Break Silence."[204] He spoke strongly against the U.S.'s role in the war, arguing that the U.S. was in Vietnam "to occupy it as an American colony"[205] and calling the U.S. government "the greatest purveyor of violence in the world today."[206] He connected the war with economic injustice, arguing that the country needed serious moral change:King opposed the Vietnam War because it took money and resources that could have been spent on social welfare at home. The United States Congress was spending more and more on the military and less and less on anti-poverty programs at the same time. He summed up this aspect by saying, "A nation that continues year after year to spend more money on military defense than on programs of social uplift is approaching spiritual death."[207] He stated that North Vietnam "did not begin to send in any large number of supplies or men until American forces had arrived in the tens of thousands",[208] and accused the U.S. of having killed a million Vietnamese, "mostly children."[209] King also criticized American opposition to North Vietnam's land reforms.[210]King's opposition cost him significant support among white allies, including President Johnson, Billy Graham,[211] union leaders and powerful publishers.[212] "The press is being stacked against me", King said,[213] complaining of what he described as a double standard that applauded his nonviolence at home, but deplored it when applied "toward little brown Vietnamese children."[214] Life magazine called the speech "demagogic slander that sounded like a script for Radio Hanoi",[207] and The Washington Post declared that King had "diminished his usefulness to his cause, his country, his people."[214][215]The "Beyond Vietnam" speech reflected King's evolving political advocacy in his later years, which paralleled the teachings of the progressive Highlander Research and Education Center, with which he was affiliated.[216][217] King began to speak of the need for fundamental changes in the political and economic life of the nation, and more frequently expressed his opposition to the war and his desire to see a redistribution of resources to correct racial and economic injustice.[218] He guarded his language in public to avoid being linked to communism by his enemies, but in private he sometimes spoke of his support for social democracy and democratic socialism.[219][220]In a 1952 letter to Coretta Scott, he said: "I imagine you already know that I am much more socialistic in my economic theory than capitalistic ..."[221] In one speech, he stated that "something is wrong with capitalism" and claimed, "There must be a better distribution of wealth, and maybe America must move toward a democratic socialism."[222] King had read Marx while at Morehouse, but while he rejected "traditional capitalism", he rejected communism because of its "materialistic interpretation of history" that denied religion, its "ethical relativism", and its "political totalitarianism."[223]King stated in "Beyond Vietnam" that "true compassion is more than flinging a coin to a beggar ... it comes to see that an edifice which produces beggars needs restructuring."[224] King quoted a United States official who said that from Vietnam to Latin America, the country was "on the wrong side of a world revolution."[224] King condemned America's "alliance with the landed gentry of Latin America", and said that the U.S. should support "the shirtless and barefoot people" in the Third World rather than suppressing their attempts at revolution.[224]King's stance on Vietnam encouraged Allard K. Lowenstein, William Sloane Coffin and Norman Thomas, with the support of anti-war Democrats, to attempt to persuade King to run against President Johnson in the 1968 United States presidential election. King contemplated but ultimately decided against the proposal on the grounds that he felt uneasy with politics and considered himself better suited for his morally unambiguous role as an activist.[225]On April 15, 1967, King participated and spoke at an anti-war march from Manhattan's Central Park to the United Nations. The march was organized by the Spring Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam and initiated by its chairman, James Bevel. At the U.N. King brought up issues of civil rights and the draft:Seeing an opportunity to unite civil rights activists and anti-war activists,[203] Bevel convinced King to become even more active in the anti-war effort.[203] Despite his growing public opposition towards the Vietnam War, King was not fond of the hippie culture which developed from the anti-war movement.[227] In his 1967 Massey Lecture, King stated:On January 13, 1968 (the day after President Johnson's State of the Union Address), King called for a large march on Washington against "one of history's most cruel and senseless wars."[228][229]Thích Nhất Hạnh was an influential Vietnamese Buddhist who taught at Princeton University and Columbia University. He had written a letter to firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder in 1965 entitled: "In Search of the Enemy of Man". It was during his 1966 stay in the US that Nhất Hạnh met with King and urged him to publicly denounce the Vietnam War.[230] In 1967, King gave a famous speech at the Riverside Church in New York City, his first to publicly question the U.S. involvement in Vietnam.[231] Later that year, King nominated Nhất Hạnh for the 1967 Nobel Peace Prize. In his nomination, King said, "I do not personally know of anyone more worthy of [this prize] than this gentle monk from Vietnam. His ideas for peace, if applied, would build a monument to ecumenism, to world brotherhood, to humanity".[232]In 1968, King and the SCLC organized the "Poor People's Campaign" to address issues of economic justice. King traveled the country to assemble "a multiracial army of the poor" that would march on Washington to engage in nonviolent civil disobedience at the Capitol until Congress created an "economic bill of rights" for poor Americans.[233][234]The campaign was preceded by King's final book, Where Do We Go from Here: Chaos or Community? which laid out his view of how to address social issues and poverty. King quoted from Henry George and George's book, Progress and Poverty, particularly in support of a guaranteed basic income.[235][236][237] The campaign culminated in a march on Washington, D.C., demanding economic aid to the poorest communities of the United States.King and the SCLC called on the government to invest in rebuilding America's cities. He felt that Congress had shown "hostility to the poor" by spending "military funds with alacrity and generosity." He contrasted this with the situation faced by poor Americans, claiming that Congress had merely provided "poverty funds with miserliness."[234] His vision was for change that was more revolutionary than mere reform: he cited systematic flaws of "racism, poverty, militarism and materialism", and argued that "reconstruction of society itself is the real issue to be faced."[238]The Poor People's Campaign was controversial even within the civil rights movement. Rustin resigned from the march, stating that the goals of the campaign were too broad, that its demands were unrealizable, and that he thought that these campaigns would accelerate the backlash and repression on the poor and the black.[239]
<h2>Assassination and aftermath</h2>
On March 29, 1968, King went to Memphis, Tennessee, in support of the black sanitary public works employees, who were represented by AFSCME Local 1733. The workers had been on strike since March 12 for higher wages and better treatment. In one incident, black street repairmen received pay for two hours when they were sent home because of bad weather, but white employees were paid for the full day.[240][241][242]On April 3, King addressed a rally and delivered his "I've Been to the Mountaintop" address[243] at Mason Temple, the world headquarters of the Church of God in Christ. King's flight to Memphis had been delayed by a bomb threat against his plane.[244] In the prophetic peroration of the last speech of his life, in reference to the bomb threat, King said the following:King was booked in Room 306 at the Lorraine Motel (owned by Walter Bailey) in Memphis. Ralph Abernathy, who was present at the assassination, testified to the United States House Select Committee on Assassinations that King and his entourage stayed at Room 306 so often that it was known as the "King-Abernathy suite."[246] According to Jesse Jackson, who was present, King's last words on the balcony before his assassination were spoken to musician Ben Branch, who was scheduled to perform that night at an event King was attending: "Ben, make sure you play 'Take My Hand, Precious Lord' in the meeting tonight. Play it real pretty."[247]King was fatally shot by James Earl Ray at 6:01 p.m., Thursday, April 4, 1968, as he stood on the motel's second-floor balcony. The bullet entered through his right cheek, smashing his jaw, then traveled down his spinal cord before lodging in his shoulder.[248][249] Abernathy heard the shot from inside the motel room and ran to the balcony to find King on the floor.[250] Jackson stated after the shooting that he cradled King's head as King lay on the balcony, but this account was disputed by other colleagues of King; Jackson later changed his statement to say that he had "reached out" for King.[251]After emergency chest surgery, King died at St. Joseph's Hospital at 7:05 p.m.[252] According to biographer Taylor Branch, King's autopsy revealed that though only 39 years old, he "had the heart of a 60 year old", which Branch attributed to the stress of 13 years in the civil rights movement.[253] King is buried within firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder National Historical Park.[254]The assassination led to a nationwide wave of race riots in Washington, D.C., Chicago, Baltimore, Louisville, Kansas City, and dozens of other cities.[255][256][257] Presidential candidate Robert F. Kennedy was on his way to Indianapolis for a campaign rally when he was informed of King's death. He gave a short, improvised speech to the gathering of supporters informing them of the tragedy and urging them to continue King's ideal of nonviolence.[258] The following day, he delivered a prepared response in Cleveland.[259] James Farmer Jr. and other civil rights leaders also called for non-violent action, while the more militant Stokely Carmichael called for a more forceful response.[260] The city of Memphis quickly settled the strike on terms favorable to the sanitation workers.[261]The plan to set up a shantytown in Washington, D.C., was carried out soon after the April 4 assassination. Criticism of King's plan was subdued in the wake of his death, and the SCLC received an unprecedented wave of donations for the purpose of carrying it out. The campaign officially began in Memphis, on May 2, at the hotel where King was murdered.[262] Thousands of demonstrators arrived on the National Mall and stayed for six weeks, establishing a camp they called "Resurrection City."[263]President Lyndon B. Johnson tried to quell the riots by making several telephone calls to civil rights leaders, mayors and governors across the United States and told politicians that they should warn the police against the unwarranted use of force.[257] But his efforts didn't work out: "I'm not getting through," Johnson told his aides. "They're all holing up like generals in a dugout getting ready to watch a war."[257] Johnson declared April 7 a national day of mourning for the civil rights leader.[264] Vice President Hubert Humphrey attended King's funeral on behalf of the President, as there were fears that Johnson's presence might incite protests and perhaps violence.[265] At his widow's request, King's last sermon at Ebenezer Baptist Church was played at the funeral,[266] a recording of his "Drum Major" sermon, given on February 4, 1968. In that sermon, King made a request that at his funeral no mention of his awards and honors be made, but that it be said that he tried to "feed the hungry", "clothe the naked", "be right on the [Vietnam] war question", and "love and serve humanity."[267] His good friend Mahalia Jackson sang his favorite hymn, "Take My Hand, Precious Lord", at the funeral.[268] The assassination helped to spur the enactment of the Civil Rights Act of 1968.[257]Two months after King's death, James Earl Ray—who was on the loose from a previous prison escape—was captured at London Heathrow Airport while trying to leave England on a false Canadian passport. He was using the alias Ramon George Sneyd on his way to white-ruled Rhodesia.[269] Ray was quickly extradited to Tennessee and charged with King's murder. He confessed to the assassination on March 10, 1969, though he recanted this confession three days later.[270] On the advice of his attorney Percy Foreman, Ray pleaded guilty to avoid a trial conviction and thus the possibility of receiving the death penalty. He was sentenced to a 99-year prison term.[270][271] Ray later claimed a man he met in Montreal, Quebec, with the alias "Raoul" was involved and that the assassination was the result of a conspiracy.[272][273] He spent the remainder of his life attempting, unsuccessfully, to withdraw his guilty plea and secure the trial he never had.[271] Ray died in 1998 at age 70.[274]Ray's lawyers maintained he was a scapegoat similar to the way that John F. Kennedy's assassin Lee Harvey Oswald is seen by conspiracy theorists.[275] Supporters of this assertion said that Ray's confession was given under pressure and that he had been threatened with the death penalty.[271][276] They admitted that Ray was a thief and burglar, but claimed that he had no record of committing violent crimes with a weapon.[273] However, prison records in different U.S. cities have shown that he was incarcerated on numerous occasions for charges of armed robbery.[277] In a 2008 interview with CNN, Jerry Ray, the younger brother of James Earl Ray, claimed that James was smart and was sometimes able to get away with armed robbery. Jerry Ray said that he had assisted his brother on one such robbery. "I never been with nobody as bold as he is," Jerry said. "He just walked in and put that gun on somebody, it was just like it's an everyday thing."[277]Those suspecting a conspiracy in the assassination point to the two successive ballistics tests which proved that a rifle similar to Ray's Remington Gamemaster had been the murder weapon. Those tests did not implicate Ray's specific rifle.[271][278] Witnesses near King at the moment of his death said that the shot came from another location. They said that it came from behind thick shrubbery near the boarding house—which had been cut away in the days following the assassination—and not from the boarding house window.[279] However, Ray's fingerprints were found on various objects (a rifle, a pair of binoculars, articles of clothing, a newspaper) that were left in the bathroom where it was determined the gunfire came from.[277] An examination of the rifle containing Ray's fingerprints determined that at least one shot was fired from the firearm at the time of the assassination.[277]In 1997, King's son Dexter Scott King met with Ray, and publicly supported Ray's efforts to obtain a new trial.[280]Two years later, King's widow Coretta Scott King and the couple's children won a wrongful death claim against Loyd Jowers and "other unknown co-conspirators." Jowers claimed to have received $100,000 to arrange King's assassination. The jury of six whites and six blacks found in favor of the King family, finding Jowers to be complicit in a conspiracy against King and that government agencies were party to the assassination.[281][282] 
William F. Pepper represented the King family in the trial.[283]In 2000, the U.S. Department of Justice completed the investigation into Jowers' claims but did not find evidence to support allegations about conspiracy. The investigation report recommended no further investigation unless some new reliable facts are presented.[284] A sister of Jowers admitted that he had fabricated the story so he could make $300,000 from selling the story, and she in turn corroborated his story in order to get some money to pay her income tax.[285][286]In 2002, The New York Times reported that a church minister, Ronald Denton Wilson, claimed his father, Henry Clay Wilson—not James Earl Ray—assassinated King. He stated, "It wasn't a racist thing; he thought firstnameplaceholder Luther King was connected with communism, and he wanted to get him out of the way." Wilson provided no evidence to back up his claims.[287]King researchers David Garrow and Gerald Posner disagreed with William F. Pepper's claims that the government killed King.[288] In 2003, Pepper published a book about the long investigation and trial, as well as his representation of James Earl Ray in his bid for a trial, laying out the evidence and criticizing other accounts.[289][290] King's friend and colleague, James Bevel, also disputed the argument that Ray acted alone, stating, "There is no way a ten-cent white boy could develop a plan to kill a million-dollar black man."[291] In 2004, Jesse Jackson stated:
<h2>Legacy</h2>
King's legacy includes influences on the Black Consciousness Movement and civil rights movement in South Africa.[293][294] King's work was cited by, and served as, an inspiration for South African leader Albert Lutuli, who fought for racial justice in his country and was later awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.[295]King influenced Irish politician and activist John Hume. Hume, the former leader of the Social Democratic and Labour Party, cited King's legacy as quintessential to the Northern Irish civil rights movement and the signing of the Good Friday Agreement, calling him "one of my great heroes of the century."[296][297][298]In the United Kingdom, The Northumbria and Newcastle Universities firstnameplaceholder Luther King Peace Committee[299] exists to honor King's legacy, as represented by his final visit to the UK to receive an honorary degree from Newcastle University in 1967.[300][301] The Peace Committee operates out of the chaplaincies of the city's two universities, Northumbria and Newcastle, both of which remain centres for the study of firstnameplaceholder Luther King and the US civil rights movement. Inspired by King's vision, it undertakes a range of activities across the UK as it seeks to "build cultures of peace."In 2017, Newcastle University unveiled a bronze statue of King to celebrate the 50th anniversary of his honorary doctorate ceremony.[302] The Students Union also voted to rename their bar Luthers.[303]King has become a national icon in the history of American liberalism and American progressivism.[304] His main legacy was to secure progress on civil rights in the U.S. Just days after King's assassination, Congress passed the Civil Rights Act of 1968.[305] Title VIII of the Act, commonly known as the Fair Housing Act, prohibited discrimination in housing and housing-related transactions on the basis of race, religion, or national origin (later expanded to include sex, familial status, and disability). This legislation was seen as a tribute to King's struggle in his final years to combat residential discrimination in the U.S.[305] The day following King's assassination, school teacher Jane Elliott conducted her first "Blue Eyes/Brown Eyes" exercise with her class of elementary school students in Riceville, Iowa. Her purpose was to help them understand King's death as it related to racism, something they little understood as they lived in a predominantly white community.[306]King's wife Coretta Scott King followed in her husband's footsteps and was active in matters of social justice and civil rights until her death in 2006. The same year that firstnameplaceholder Luther King was assassinated, she established the King Center in Atlanta, Georgia, dedicated to preserving his legacy and the work of championing nonviolent conflict resolution and tolerance worldwide.[307] Their son, Dexter King, serves as the center's chairman.[308][309] Daughter Yolanda King, who died in 2007, was a motivational speaker, author and founder of Higher Ground Productions, an organization specializing in diversity training.[310]Even within the King family, members disagree about his religious and political views about gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender people. King's widow Coretta publicly said that she believed her husband would have supported gay rights.[311] However, his youngest child, Bernice King, has said publicly that he would have been opposed to gay marriage.[312]On February 4, 1968, at the Ebenezer Baptist Church, in speaking about how he wished to be remembered after his death, King stated:On June 25, 2019, The New York Times Magazine listed firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder among hundreds of artists whose material was reportedly destroyed in the 2008 Universal Studios fire.[314]Beginning in 1971, cities such as St. Louis, Missouri, and states established annual holidays to honor King.[315] At the White House Rose Garden on November 2, 1983, President Ronald Reagan signed a bill creating a federal holiday to honor King. Observed for the first time on January 20, 1986, it is called firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Day. Following President George H. W. Bush's 1992 proclamation, the holiday is observed on the third Monday of January each year, near the time of King's birthday.[316][317] On January 17, 2000, for the first time, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Day was officially observed in all fifty U.S. states.[318] Arizona (1992), New Hampshire (1999) and Utah (2000) were the last three states to recognize the holiday. Utah previously celebrated the holiday at the same time but under the name Human Rights Day.[319]
<h2>Veneration</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder[320] was canonized[321] by Archbishop Timothy Paul of the Holy Christian Orthodox Church[322] (not in communion with the Eastern Orthodox Church)[323] on 9 September 2016[324] in the Christian Cathedral in Springfield, Massachusetts,[325] his feast day is April 4, the date of his assassination. King is honored[326] with a Lesser Feast on the liturgical calendar of the Episcopal Church in the United States of America[327] on April 4[328] or January 15.[329] The Evangelical Lutheran Church in America commemorates King liturgically on the anniversary of his birth, January 15.[330]
<h2>Ideas, influences, and political stances</h2>
As a Christian minister, King's main influence was Jesus Christ and the Christian gospels, which he would almost always quote in his religious meetings, speeches at church, and in public discourses. King's faith was strongly based in Jesus' commandment of loving your neighbor as yourself, loving God above all, and loving your enemies, praying for them and blessing them. His nonviolent thought was also based in the injunction to turn the other cheek in the Sermon on the Mount, and Jesus' teaching of putting the sword back into its place (Matthew 26:52).[331] In his famous Letter from Birmingham Jail, King urged action consistent with what he describes as Jesus' "extremist" love, and also quoted numerous other Christian pacifist authors, which was very usual for him. In another sermon, he stated:King's private writings show that he rejected biblical literalism; he described the Bible as "mythological," doubted that Jesus was born of a virgin and did not believe that the story of Jonah and the whale was true.[334]In 1959, King published a short book called The Measure of A Man, which contained his sermons "What is Man?" and "The Dimensions of a Complete Life." The sermons argued for man's need for God's love and criticized the racial injustices of Western civilization.[335]Veteran African-American civil rights activist Bayard Rustin was King's first regular advisor on nonviolence.[337] King was also advised by the white activists Harris Wofford and Glenn Smiley.[338] Rustin and Smiley came from the Christian pacifist tradition, and Wofford and Rustin both studied Mahatma Gandhi's teachings. Rustin had applied nonviolence with the Journey of Reconciliation campaign in the 1940s,[339] and Wofford had been promoting Gandhism to Southern blacks since the early 1950s.[338]King had initially known little about Gandhi and rarely used the term "nonviolence" during his early years of activism in the early 1950s. King initially believed in and practiced self-defense, even obtaining guns in his household as a means of defense against possible attackers. The pacifists guided King by showing him the alternative of nonviolent resistance, arguing that this would be a better means to accomplish his goals of civil rights than self-defense. King then vowed to no longer personally use arms.[340][341]In the aftermath of the boycott, King wrote Stride Toward Freedom, which included the chapter Pilgrimage to Nonviolence. King outlined his understanding of nonviolence, which seeks to win an opponent to friendship, rather than to humiliate or defeat him. The chapter draws from an address by Wofford, with Rustin and Stanley Levison also providing guidance and ghostwriting.[342]King was inspired by Gandhi and his success with nonviolent activism, and as a theology student, King described Gandhi as being one of the "individuals who greatly reveal the working of the Spirit of God".[343] King had "for a long time ... wanted to take a trip to India."[344] With assistance from Harris Wofford, the American Friends Service Committee, and other supporters, he was able to fund the journey in April 1959.[345][346] The trip to India affected King, deepening his understanding of nonviolent resistance and his commitment to America's struggle for civil rights. In a radio address made during his final evening in India, King reflected, "Since being in India, I am more convinced than ever before that the method of nonviolent resistance is the most potent weapon available to oppressed people in their struggle for justice and human dignity."King's admiration of Gandhi's nonviolence did not diminish in later years. He went so far as to hold up his example when receiving the Nobel Peace Prize in 1964, hailing the "successful precedent" of using nonviolence "in a magnificent way by Mohandas K. Gandhi to challenge the might of the British Empire ... He struggled only with the weapons of truth, soul force, non-injury and courage."[347]Another influence for King's nonviolent method was Henry David Thoreau's essay On Civil Disobedience and its theme of refusing to cooperate with an evil system.[348] He also was greatly influenced by the works of Protestant theologians Reinhold Niebuhr and Paul Tillich,[349] and said that Walter Rauschenbusch's Christianity and the Social Crisis left an "indelible imprint" on his thinking by giving him a theological grounding for his social concerns.[350][351] King was moved by Rauschenbusch's vision of Christians spreading social unrest in "perpetual but friendly conflict" with the state, simultaneously critiquing it and calling it to act as an instrument of justice.[352] However, he was apparently unaware of the American tradition of Christian pacifism exemplified by Adin Ballou and William Lloyd Garrison.[353] King frequently referred to Jesus' Sermon on the Mount as central for his work.[351][354][355][356] King also sometimes used the concept of "agape" (brotherly Christian love).[357] However, after 1960, he ceased employing it in his writings.[358]Even after renouncing his personal use of guns, King had a complex relationship with the phenomenon of self-defense in the movement. He publicly discouraged it as a widespread practice, but acknowledged that it was sometimes necessary.[359] Throughout his career King was frequently protected by other civil rights activists who carried arms, such as Colonel Stone Johnson,[360] Robert Hayling, and the Deacons for Defense and Justice.[361][362]King was criticized by other black leaders during the course of his participation in the civil rights movement. This included opposition by more militant thinkers such as Nation of Islam member Malcolm X.[363] Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee founder Ella Baker regarded King as a charismatic media figure who lost touch with the grassroots of the movement[364] as he became close to elite figures like Nelson Rockefeller.[365] Stokely Carmichael, a protege of Baker's, became a black separatist and disagreed with King's plea for racial integration because he considered it an insult to a uniquely African-American culture.[366][367]King was an avid supporter of Native American rights. Native Americans were also active supporters of King's civil rights movement which included the active participation of Native Americans.[368] In fact, the Native American Rights Fund (NARF) was patterned after the NAACP's Legal Defense and Education Fund.[369] The National Indian Youth Council (NIYC) was especially supportive in King's campaigns especially the Poor People's Campaign in 1968.[370] In King's book Why We Can't Wait he writes:King assisted Native American people in south Alabama in the late 1950s.[369] At that time the remaining Creek in Alabama were trying to completely desegregate schools in their area. The South had many egregious racial problems: In this case, light-complexioned Native children were allowed to ride school buses to previously all white schools, while dark-skinned Native children from the same band were barred from riding the same buses.[369] Tribal leaders, upon hearing of King's desegregation campaign in Birmingham, Alabama, contacted him for assistance. He promptly responded and through his intervention the problem was quickly resolved.[369]In September 1959, King flew from Los Angeles, California, to Tucson, Arizona.[372] After giving a speech at the University of Arizona on the ideals of using nonviolent methods in creating social change. He put into words his belief that one must not use force in this struggle "but match the violence of his opponents with his suffering."[372] King then went to Southside Presbyterian, a predominantly Native American church, and was fascinated by their photos. On the spur of the moment, King wanted to go to an Indian Reservation to meet the people so Reverend Casper Glenn took King to the Papago Indian Reservation.[372] At the reservation King met with all the tribal leaders, and others on the reservation then ate with them.[372] King then visited another Presbyterian church near the reservation, and preached there attracting a Native American crowd.[372] He later returned to Old Pueblo in March 1962 where he preached again to a Native American congregation, and then went on to give another speech at the University of Arizona.[372] King would continue to attract the attention of Native Americans throughout the civil rights movement. During the 1963 March on Washington there was a sizable Native American contingent, including many from South Dakota, and many from the Navajo nation.[369][373] Native Americans were also active participants in the Poor People's Campaign in 1968.[370]King was a major inspiration along with the civil rights movement which inspired the Native American rights movement of the 1960s and many of its leaders.[369] John Echohawk a member of the Pawnee tribe and the executive director and one of the founders of the Native American Rights Fund stated:As the leader of the SCLC, King maintained a policy of not publicly endorsing a U.S. political party or candidate: "I feel someone must remain in the position of non-alignment, so that he can look objectively at both parties and be the conscience of both—not the servant or master of either."[375] In a 1958 interview, he expressed his view that neither party was perfect, saying, "I don't think the Republican party is a party full of the almighty God nor is the Democratic party. They both have weaknesses ... And I'm not inextricably bound to either party."[376] King did praise Democratic Senator Paul Douglas of Illinois as being the "greatest of all senators" because of his fierce advocacy for civil rights causes over the years.[377]King critiqued both parties' performance on promoting racial equality:Although King never publicly supported a political party or candidate for president, in a letter to a civil rights supporter in October 1956 he said that he had not decided whether he would vote for Adlai Stevenson II or Dwight D. Eisenhower at the 1956 presidential election, but that "In the past, I always voted the Democratic ticket."[379] In his autobiography, King says that in 1960 he privately voted for Democratic candidate John F. Kennedy: "I felt that Kennedy would make the best president. I never came out with an endorsement. My father did, but I never made one." King adds that he likely would have made an exception to his non-endorsement policy for a second Kennedy term, saying "Had President Kennedy lived, I would probably have endorsed him in 1964."[380]In 1964, King urged his supporters "and all people of goodwill" to vote against Republican Senator Barry Goldwater for president, saying that his election "would be a tragedy, and certainly suicidal almost, for the nation and the world."[381]King supported the ideals of social democracy and democratic socialism, although he was reluctant to speak directly of this support due to the anti-communist sentiment being projected throughout the United States at the time, and the association of socialism with communism. King believed that capitalism could not adequately provide the necessities of many American people, particularly the African-American community.[221]King stated that black Americans, as well as other disadvantaged Americans, should be compensated for historical wrongs. In an interview conducted for Playboy in 1965, he said that granting black Americans only equality could not realistically close the economic gap between them and whites. King said that he did not seek a full restitution of wages lost to slavery, which he believed impossible, but proposed a government compensatory program of $50 billion over ten years to all disadvantaged groups.[382]He posited that "the money spent would be more than amply justified by the benefits that would accrue to the nation through a spectacular decline in school dropouts, family breakups, crime rates, illegitimacy, swollen relief rolls, rioting and other social evils."[383] He presented this idea as an application of the common law regarding settlement of unpaid labor, but clarified that he felt that the money should not be spent exclusively on blacks. He stated, "It should benefit the disadvantaged of all races."[384]On being awarded the Planned Parenthood Federation of America's Margaret Sanger Award on May 5, 1966, King said:Actress Nichelle Nichols planned to leave the science-fiction television series Star Trek in 1967 after its first season, wanting to return to musical theater.[387] She changed her mind after talking to King[388] who was a fan of the show. King explained that her character signified a future of greater racial harmony and cooperation.[389] King told Nichols, "You are our image of where we're going, you're 300 years from now, and that means that's where we are and it takes place now. Keep doing what you're doing, you are our inspiration."[390] As Nichols recounted, "Star Trek was one of the only shows that [King] and his wife Coretta would allow their little children to watch. And I thanked him and I told him I was leaving the show. All the smile came off his face. And he said, 'Don't you understand for the first time we're seen as we should be seen. You don't have a black role. You have an equal role.'"[387] For his part, the series' creator, Gene Roddenberry, was deeply moved upon learning of King's support.[391]King believed Israel has a right to exist, saying "Peace for Israel means security, and we must stand with all our might to protect her right to exist, its territorial integrity and the right to use whatever sea lanes it needs. Israel is one of the great outposts of democracy in the world, and a marvelous example of what can be done, how desert land can be transformed into an oasis of brotherhood and democracy. Peace for Israel means security, and that security must be a reality."[392]A boy once asked King about how he should deal with his homosexuality. King replied:[393][394]
<h2>State surveillance and coercion</h2>
FBI director J. Edgar Hoover personally ordered surveillance of King, with the intent to undermine his power as a civil rights leader.[395][396] The Church Committee, a 1975 investigation by the U.S. Congress, found that "From December 1963 until his death in 1968, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was the target of an intensive campaign by the Federal Bureau of Investigation to 'neutralize' him as an effective civil rights leader."[397]In the fall of 1963, the FBI received authorization from Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy to proceed with wiretapping of King's phone lines, purportedly due to his association with Stanley Levison.[398] The Bureau informed President John F. Kennedy. He and his brother unsuccessfully tried to persuade King to dissociate himself from Levison, a New York lawyer who had been involved with Communist Party USA.[399][400] Although Robert Kennedy only gave written approval for limited wiretapping of King's telephone lines "on a trial basis, for a month or so",[401] Hoover extended the clearance so his men were "unshackled" to look for evidence in any areas of King's life they deemed worthy.[112]The Bureau placed wiretaps on the home and office phone lines of both Levison and King, and bugged King's rooms in hotels as he traveled across the country.[399][402] In 1967, Hoover listed the SCLC as a black nationalist hate group, with the instructions: "No opportunity should be missed to exploit through counterintelligence techniques the organizational and personal conflicts of the leaderships of the groups ... to insure [sic] the targeted group is disrupted, ridiculed, or discredited."[396][403]In a secret operation code-named "Minaret", the National Security Agency monitored the communications of leading Americans, including King, who were critical of the U.S. war in Vietnam.[404] A review by the NSA itself concluded that Minaret was "disreputable if not outright illegal."[404]For years, Hoover had been suspicious of potential influence of communists in social movements such as labor unions and civil rights.[405] Hoover directed the FBI to track King in 1957, and the SCLC when it was established.[3]Due to the relationship between King and Stanley Levison, the FBI feared Levison was working as an "agent of influence" over King, in spite of its own reports in 1963 that Levison had left the Party and was no longer associated in business dealings with them.[406] Another King lieutenant, Jack O'Dell, was also linked to the Communist Party by sworn testimony before the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC).[407]Despite the extensive surveillance conducted, by 1976 the FBI had acknowledged that it had not obtained any evidence that King himself or the SCLC were actually involved with any communist organizations.[397]For his part, King adamantly denied having any connections to communism. In a 1965 Playboy interview, he stated that "there are as many Communists in this freedom movement as there are Eskimos in Florida."[408] He argued that Hoover was "following the path of appeasement of political powers in the South" and that his concern for communist infiltration of the civil rights movement was meant to "aid and abet the salacious claims of southern racists and the extreme right-wing elements."[397] Hoover did not believe King's pledge of innocence and replied by saying that King was "the most notorious liar in the country."[409] After King gave his "I Have A Dream" speech during the March on Washington on August 28, 1963, the FBI described King as "the most dangerous and effective Negro leader in the country."[402] It alleged that he was "knowingly, willingly and regularly cooperating with and taking guidance from communists."[410]The attempts to prove that King was a communist was related to the feeling of many segregationists that blacks in the South were content with the status quo, but had been stirred up by "communists" and "outside agitators."[411] As context, the civil rights movement in 1950s and '60s arose from activism within the black community dating back to before World War I. King said that "the Negro revolution is a genuine revolution, born from the same womb that produces all massive social upheavals—the womb of intolerable conditions and unendurable situations."[412]CIA files declassified in 2017 revealed that the agency was investigating possible links between King and Communism after a Washington Post article dated November 4, 1964, claimed he was invited to the Soviet Union and that Ralph Abernathy, as spokesman for King, refused to comment on the source of the invitation.[413] Mail belonging to King and other civil rights activists was intercepted by the CIA program HTLINGUAL.[414]The FBI having concluded that King was dangerous due to communist infiltration, attempts to discredit King began through revelations regarding his private life. FBI surveillance of King, some of it since made public, attempted to demonstrate that he also had numerous extramarital affairs.[402] Lyndon B. Johnson once said that King was a "hypocritical preacher".[416]In his 1989 autobiography And the Walls Came Tumbling Down, Ralph Abernathy stated that King had a "weakness for women", although they "all understood and believed in the biblical prohibition against sex outside of marriage. It was just that he had a particularly difficult time with that temptation."[417] In a later interview, Abernathy said that he only wrote the term "womanizing", that he did not specifically say King had extramarital sex and that the infidelities King had were emotional rather than sexual.[418]Abernathy criticized the media for sensationalizing the statements he wrote about King's affairs,[418] such as the allegation that he admitted in his book that King had a sexual affair the night before he was assassinated.[418] In his original wording, Abernathy had stated that he saw King coming out of his room with a woman when he awoke the next morning and later said that "he may have been in there discussing and debating and trying to get her to go along with the movement, I don't know...the Sanitation Worker's Strike."[418]In his 1986 book Bearing the Cross, David Garrow wrote about a number of extramarital affairs, including one woman King saw almost daily. According to Garrow, "that relationship ... increasingly became the emotional centerpiece of King's life, but it did not eliminate the incidental couplings ... of King's travels." He alleged that King explained his extramarital affairs as "a form of anxiety reduction." Garrow asserted that King's supposed promiscuity caused him "painful and at times overwhelming guilt."[419] King's wife Coretta appeared to have accepted his affairs with equanimity, saying once that "all that other business just doesn't have a place in the very high-level relationship we enjoyed."[420] Shortly after Bearing the Cross was released, civil rights author Howell Raines gave the book a positive review but opined that Garrow's allegations about King's sex life were "sensational" and stated that Garrow was "amassing facts rather than analyzing them."[421]The FBI distributed reports regarding such affairs to the executive branch, friendly reporters, potential coalition partners and funding sources of the SCLC, and King's family.[422] The bureau also sent anonymous letters to King threatening to reveal information if he did not cease his civil rights work.[423] The FBI–King suicide letter sent to King just before he received the Nobel Peace Prize read, in part:The letter was accompanied by a tape recording—excerpted from FBI wiretaps—of several of King's extramarital liaisons.[426] King interpreted this package as an attempt to drive him to suicide,[427] although William Sullivan, head of the Domestic Intelligence Division at the time, argued that it may have only been intended to "convince Dr. King to resign from the SCLC."[397] King refused to give in to the FBI's threats.[402]In 1977, Judge John Lewis Smith Jr. ordered all known copies of the recorded audiotapes and written transcripts resulting from the FBI's electronic surveillance of King between 1963 and 1968 to be held in the National Archives and sealed from public access until 2027.[428]In May 2019, FBI files emerged alleging that King "looked on, laughed and offered advice" as one of his friends raped a woman. His biographer, David Garrow, wrote that "the suggestion... that he either actively tolerated or personally employed violence against any woman, even while drunk, poses so fundamental a challenge to his historical stature as to require the most complete and extensive historical review possible".[429] These allegations sparked a heated debate among historians.[430] Clayborne Carson, firstnameplaceholder Luther King biographer and overseer of the Dr. King records at Stanford University states that he came to the opposite conclusion of Garrow saying "None of this is new. Garrow is talking about a recently added summary of a transcript of a 1964 recording from the Willard Hotel that others, including Mrs. King, have said they did not hear firstnameplaceholder's voice on it. The added summary was four layers removed from the actual recording. This supposedly new information comes from an anonymous source in a single paragraph in an FBI report. You have to ask how could anyone conclude King looked at a rape from an audio recording in a room where he was not present."[431] Carson bases his position of Coretta Scott King's memoirs where she states "I set up our reel-to-reel recorder and listened. I have read scores of reports talking about the scurrilous activities of my husband but once again, there was nothing at all incriminating on the tape. It was a social event with people laughing and telling dirty jokes. But I did not hear firstnameplaceholder's voice on it, and there was nothing about sex or anything else resembling the lies J. Edgar and the FBI were spreading." The tapes that could confirm or refute the allegation are scheduled to be declassified in 2027.[432]A fire station was located across from the Lorraine Motel, next to the boarding house in which James Earl Ray was staying. Police officers were stationed in the fire station to keep King under surveillance.[433] Agents were watching King at the time he was shot.[434] Immediately following the shooting, officers rushed out of the station to the motel. Marrell McCollough, an undercover police officer, was the first person to administer first aid to King.[435] The antagonism between King and the FBI, the lack of an all points bulletin to find the killer, and the police presence nearby led to speculation that the FBI was involved in the assassination.[436]
<h2>Awards and recognition</h2>
King was awarded at least fifty honorary degrees from colleges and universities.[437] On October 14, 1964, King became the (at the time) youngest winner of the Nobel Peace Prize, which was awarded to him for leading nonviolent resistance to racial prejudice in the U.S.[438][439] In 1965, he was awarded the American Liberties Medallion by the American Jewish Committee for his "exceptional advancement of the principles of human liberty."[437][440] In his acceptance remarks, King said, "Freedom is one thing. You have it all or you are not free."[441]In 1957, he was awarded the Spingarn Medal from the NAACP.[442] Two years later, he won the Anisfield-Wolf Book Award for his book Stride Toward Freedom: The Montgomery Story.[443] In 1966, the Planned Parenthood Federation of America awarded King the Margaret Sanger Award for "his courageous resistance to bigotry and his lifelong dedication to the advancement of social justice and human dignity."[444] Also in 1966, King was elected as a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.[445] In November 1967 he made a 24-hour trip to the United Kingdom to receive an honorary degree from Newcastle University, being the first African-American to be so honoured by Newcastle.[301] In a moving impromptu acceptance speech,[300] he saidIn addition to being nominated for three Grammy Awards, the civil rights leader posthumously won for Best Spoken Word Recording in 1971 for "Why I Oppose The War In Vietnam".[446]In 1977, the Presidential Medal of Freedom was posthumously awarded to King by President Jimmy Carter. The citation read:King and his wife were also awarded the Congressional Gold Medal in 2004.[448]King was second in Gallup's List of Most Widely Admired People of the 20th Century.[449] In 1963, he was named Time Person of the Year, and in 2000, he was voted sixth in an online "Person of the Century" poll by the same magazine.[450] King placed third in the Greatest American contest conducted by the Discovery Channel and AOL.[451]On April 20, 2016, Treasury Secretary Jacob Lew announced that the $5, $10, and $20 bills would all undergo redesign prior to 2020. Lew said that while Lincoln would remain on the front of the $5 bill, the reverse would be redesigned to depict various historical events that had occurred at the Lincoln Memorial. Among the planned designs are images from King's "I Have a Dream" speech and the 1939 concert by opera singer Marian Anderson.[452]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder Samuel secondnameplaceholder (5 October 1887 – 20 February 1976) was a French jurist known for co-authoring the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and receiving the Nobel Peace Prize.secondnameplaceholder was born in Bayonne. He served as a soldier in World War I.On June 24, 1940, secondnameplaceholder heeded General Charles de Gaulle's radio appeal and joined him in London, using his legal expertise to help the Free French.Between 1944 and 1959 secondnameplaceholder was a member of the Council of State.
Seconded to the UN Commission on Human Rights after the war, he was a major contributor to the 1946 Universal Declaration of Human Rights. For this work he received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1968. That same year, he was awarded one of the UN General Assembly's Human Rights Prizes.
<h2>Personal life</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born in Bayonne 5 October 1887, to a Sephardi Jewish family.[1] He grew up in Nice, where he attended the Lycée Masséna [fr], and graduated with a bachelor's degree at 17. He matriculated at the University of Aix, studying political economics, constitutional history, and Roman law, and awarded distinctions in law, and a university degree with distinction, and a first prize in the  competitive examinations in the faculty of law. In 1914 in Paris, he was awarded his doctorate in juridical science, economics, and politics.[2]secondnameplaceholder died in Paris in 1976 and was initially interred at the Montparnasse Cemetery in Paris. In 1987, his remains were exhumed and enshrined in the crypt of the Pantheon in Paris.
<h2>Career</h2>
secondnameplaceholder served in World War I in 1916 at the Battle of the Meuse.  In one operation he led to attack enemy positions he was gravely injured in the arm, side, and stomach by machine gun fire. A medic saved his life, but he only received surgical treatment ten days later at Antibes. He was awarded the Croix de Guerre for his actions, but was too gravely injured to return to active duty,[2] and was mustered out as a war invalid.[3]He formed the Union Fédérale, a leftist, pacifist organisation for veterans.[citation needed]secondnameplaceholder also headed many Non-Governmental Organisations (NGO), founding the French Federation of Disabled War Veterans in 1918 and until 1940 serving as its president and then honorary president.As French delegate to the League of Nations from 1924 to 1938, secondnameplaceholder pressed for progress on disarmament and in developing institutions to aid the resolution of international conflicts.Refusing the ceasefire, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder embarked on a British ship, the SS Ettrick, in Saint-Jean-de-Luz on June 24, 1940 and joined General Charles de Gaulle in London to help him continue the war against Germany. He was, therefore, one of the first to join him.[4][page needed] De Gaulle needed legal help to draft the statutes of Free France, so his arrival in London was very welcome.[5] firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder did not speak English but already knew leading academics and political figures, like Foreign Minister Anthony Eden.[6]In April 1941, secondnameplaceholder made a radio broadcast from London, addressing himself especially to French Jews from a secular viewpoint and reminding them of the full and equal protection France had always offered Jews since the Revolution. He exhorted them to pay back that debt in part by joining the forces of Free France. In May, the Vichy Regime stripped secondnameplaceholder of his French citizenship, and in 1942 sentenced him to death in absentia.[7]Following World War Two, secondnameplaceholder was assigned to the United Nations, helping to draft the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Working from a list of rights elaborated by Canadian scholar and professor of law John Humphrey, secondnameplaceholder produced a revised draft and expanded the text.[8]He served on the UN's Human Rights Commission and the Hague Court of Arbitration.He was also a member (1959–1965) and president (1965–1968) of the European Court of Human Rights. Today the court building is on the Allée firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder in Strasbourg.In 1945, Charles de Gaulle suggested secondnameplaceholder, having done so much for the French people, also do something to help the Jewish people. secondnameplaceholder became the president of the French-Jewish Alliance Israelite Universelle (AIU) which had previously been primarily dedicated to educating Sephardi Jews living under the rule of the Ottoman Empire according to a French modernist curriculum. As president of the AIU, secondnameplaceholder worked with the American Jewish Committee and the Anglo-Jewish Association,  to found the Consultative Council of Jewish Organisations, a network dedicated to building support for secondnameplaceholder's platform of human rights from a Jewish perspective[clarification needed] while the UN human rights system was in its early stages of development.[9][page needed]In 1947, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder created the French Institute of Administrative Sciences (IFSA). He was the first president of this association which organized many conferences helping to develop the French doctrine in administrative law.[clarification needed]On 10 November 1950, he was photographed at a U.N. radio alongside Karim Azkoul, Georges Day and Herald C.L. Roy, participating in a roundtable discussion for the use of French-speaking countries. This is perhaps all the more interesting because Azkoul and secondnameplaceholder differed so strongly in their perspectives concerning the politics of Zionism.[10]
<h2>Legacy</h2>
In 2001, CCJO firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was founded in secondnameplaceholder's memory to promote Universal Human Rights from a Jewish perspective. The firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder medal is awarded by the CCJO to those who have made an outstanding global contribution to human rights. As the head of the Alliance Israélite in France, he pursued civil rights for the Jews and was an active Zionist. A high school in Jerusalem is named after him.[citation needed]In 2003, the Basque Government created the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Award, "with the goal of publicly acknowledging and rewarding individuals or collectives that, through their personal or professional path, showed a strong commitment to the promotion, defence and divulgation of Human Rights". The award is given on December 10, International Human Rights Day.[11]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder Ernest secondnameplaceholder (/ˈbɔːrlɔːɡ/; March 25, 1914 – September 12, 2009)[3] was an American agronomist who led initiatives worldwide that contributed to the extensive increases in agricultural production termed the Green Revolution. secondnameplaceholder was awarded multiple honors for his work, including the Nobel Peace Prize, the Presidential Medal of Freedom and the Congressional Gold Medal.secondnameplaceholder received his B.S. in forestry in 1937 and Ph.D. in plant pathology and genetics from the University of Minnesota in 1942. He took up an agricultural research position with CIMMYT in Mexico, where he developed semi-dwarf, high-yield, disease-resistant wheat varieties.[1][2] During the mid-20th century, secondnameplaceholder led the introduction of these high-yielding varieties combined with modern agricultural production techniques to Mexico, Pakistan, and India. As a result, Mexico became a net exporter of wheat by 1963. Between 1965 and 1970, wheat yields nearly doubled in Pakistan and India, greatly improving the food security in those nations.[4]secondnameplaceholder was often called "the father of the Green Revolution",[5][6] and is credited with saving over a billion people worldwide from starvation.[7][8][9][10] According to Jan Douglas, executive assistant to the president of the World Food Prize Foundation, the source of this number is Gregg Easterbrook's 1997 article "Forgotten Benefactor of Humanity." The article states that the "form of agriculture that secondnameplaceholder preaches may have prevented a billion deaths."[11] He was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1970 in recognition of his contributions to world peace through increasing food supply.Later in his life, he helped apply these methods of increasing food production in Asia and Africa.[12]
<h2>Early life, education and family</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was the great-grandchild of Norwegian immigrants to the United States. Ole Olson Dybevig and Solveig Thomasdatter Rinde, of Feios, a small village in Vik kommune, Sogn og Fjordane, Norway, emigrated to Dane County, Wisconsin, in 1854.[citation needed] The family eventually moved to the small Norwegian-American community of Saude, near Cresco, Iowa. There they were members of Saude Lutheran Church, where firstnameplaceholder was both baptized and confirmed.secondnameplaceholder was born to Henry Oliver (1889–1971) and Clara (Vaala) secondnameplaceholder (1888–1972) on his grandparents' farm in Saude in 1914, the first of four children. His three sisters were Palma Lillian (Behrens; 1916–2004), Charlotte (Culbert; b. 1919) and Helen (b. 1921). From age seven to nineteen, he worked on the 106-acre (43 ha) family farm west of Protivin, Iowa, fishing, hunting, and raising corn, oats, timothy-grass, cattle, pigs and chickens. He attended the one-teacher, one-room New Oregon #8 rural school in Howard County, through eighth grade.Today, the school building, built in 1865, is owned by the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Heritage Foundation as part of "Project secondnameplaceholder Legacy".[13] secondnameplaceholder was a member of the football, baseball and wrestling teams at Cresco High School, where his wrestling coach, Dave Barthelma, continually encouraged him to "give 105%".[14]secondnameplaceholder attributed his decision to leave the farm and pursue further education to his grandfather's urgent encouragement to learn:  Nels Olson secondnameplaceholder (1859–1935) once told him, "you're wiser to fill your head now if you want to fill your belly later on."[15] When secondnameplaceholder applied for admission to the University of Minnesota in 1933, he failed its entrance exam, but was accepted at the school's newly created two-year General College. After two quarters, he transferred to the College of Agriculture's forestry program. As a member of University of Minnesota's varsity wrestling team, secondnameplaceholder reached the Big Ten semifinals, and promoted the sport to Minnesota high schools in exhibition matches all around the state.To finance his studies, secondnameplaceholder put his education on hold periodically to earn some income, as he did in 1935 as a leader in the Civilian Conservation Corps, working with the unemployed on Federal projects. Many of the people who worked for him were starving. He later recalled, "I saw how food changed them ... All of this left scars on me".[17] From 1935 to 1938, before and after receiving his Bachelor of Science in forestry in 1937, secondnameplaceholder worked for the United States Forest Service at stations in Massachusetts and Idaho. He spent one summer in the middle fork of Idaho's Salmon River, the most isolated piece of wilderness in the nation at that time.[17]In the last months of his undergraduate education, secondnameplaceholder attended a Sigma Xi lecture by Elvin Charles Stakman, a professor and soon-to-be head of the plant pathology group at the University of Minnesota. The event was a pivot for secondnameplaceholder's future. Stakman, in his speech entitled "These Shifty Little Enemies that Destroy our Food Crops", discussed the manifestation of the plant disease rust, a parasitic fungus that feeds on phytonutrients in wheat, oats, and barley crops. He had discovered that special plant breeding methods produced plants resistant to rust. His research greatly interested secondnameplaceholder, and when secondnameplaceholder's job at the Forest Service was eliminated because of budget cuts, he asked Stakman if he should go into forest pathology. Stakman advised him to focus on plant pathology instead.[16] He subsequently enrolled at the university to study plant pathology under Stakman. secondnameplaceholder earned a Master of Science degree in 1940, and a Ph.D. in plant pathology and genetics in 1942.secondnameplaceholder was a member of the Alpha Gamma Rho fraternity. While in college, he met his future wife, Margaret Gibson, as he waited tables at a coffee shop in the university's  Dinkytown, where the two of them worked. They were married in 1937 and had three children, Norma Jean "Jeanie" Laube, Scotty (who died from spina bifida soon after birth), and William; five grandchildren, and six great-grandchildren. On March 8, 2007, Margaret secondnameplaceholder died at the age of ninety-five, following a fall.[18] They had been married for sixty nine years. secondnameplaceholder resided in northern Dallas the last years of his life, although his global humanitarian efforts left him with only a few weeks of the year to spend there.[17]
<h2>Career</h2>
From 1942 to 1944, secondnameplaceholder was employed as a microbiologist at DuPont in Wilmington, Delaware. It was planned that he would lead research on industrial and agricultural bacteriocides, fungicides, and preservatives. However, following the December 7, 1941, attack on Pearl Harbor secondnameplaceholder tried to enlist in the military, but was rejected under wartime labor regulations; his lab was converted to conduct research for the United States armed forces. One of his first projects was to develop glue that could withstand the warm salt water of the South Pacific. The Imperial Japanese Navy had gained control of the island of Guadalcanal, and patrolled the sky and sea by day. The only way for U.S. forces to supply the troops stranded on the island was to approach at night by speedboat, and jettison boxes of canned food and other supplies into the surf to wash ashore. The problem was that the glue holding these containers together disintegrated in saltwater. Within weeks, secondnameplaceholder and his colleagues had developed an adhesive that resisted corrosion, allowing food and supplies to reach the stranded Marines. Other tasks included work with camouflage; canteen disinfectants; DDT to control malaria; and insulation for small electronics.[17]In 1940, the Avila Camacho administration took office in Mexico. The administration's primary goal for Mexican agriculture was augmenting the nation's industrialization and economic growth. U.S. Vice President-Elect Henry Wallace, who was instrumental in persuading the Rockefeller Foundation to work with the Mexican government in agricultural development, saw Avila Camacho's ambitions as beneficial to U.S. economic and military interests.[19] The Rockefeller Foundation contacted E.C. Stakman and two other leading agronomists. They developed a proposal for a new organization, the Office of Special Studies, as part of the Mexican Government, but directed by the Rockefeller Foundation. It was to be staffed with both Mexican and US scientists, focusing on soil development, maize and wheat production, and plant pathology.Stakman chose Dr. Jacob George "Dutch" Harrar as project leader. Harrar immediately set out to hire secondnameplaceholder as head of the newly established Cooperative Wheat Research and Production Program in Mexico; secondnameplaceholder declined, choosing to finish his war service at DuPont.[20] In July 1944, after rejecting DuPont's offer to double his salary, and temporarily leaving behind his pregnant wife and 14-month-old daughter, he flew to Mexico City to head the new program as a geneticist and plant pathologist.[17]In 1964, he was made the director of the International Wheat Improvement Program at El Batán, Texcoco, on the eastern fringes of Mexico City, as part of the newly established Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research's International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center (Centro Internacional de Mejoramiento de Maíz y Trigo, or CIMMYT). Funding for this autonomous international research training institute developed from the Cooperative Wheat Research Production Program was undertaken jointly by the Ford and Rockefeller Foundations and the Mexican government.secondnameplaceholder retired officially from the position in 1979, but remained a CIMMYT senior consultant. In addition to taking up charitable and educational roles, he continued to be involved in plant research at CIMMYT with wheat, triticale, barley, maize, and high-altitude sorghum.In 1981, secondnameplaceholder became a founding member of the World Cultural Council.[21]In 1984, secondnameplaceholder began teaching and conducting research at Texas A&M University. Eventually being given the title Distinguished Professor of International Agriculture at the university and the holder of the Eugene Butler Endowed Chair in Agricultural Biotechnology, secondnameplaceholder remained at A&M until his death in September 2009.
<h2>Wheat research in Mexico</h2>
The Cooperative Wheat Research Production Program, a joint venture by the Rockefeller Foundation and the Mexican Ministry of Agriculture, involved research in genetics, plant breeding, plant pathology, entomology, agronomy, soil science, and cereal technology. The goal of the project was to boost wheat production in Mexico, which at the time was importing a large portion of its grain. Plant pathologist George Harrar recruited and assembled the wheat research team in late 1944. The four other members were soil scientist William Colwell; maize breeder Edward Wellhausen; potato breeder John Niederhauser; and firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, all from the United States.[22] During the sixteen years secondnameplaceholder remained with the project, he bred a series of remarkably successful high-yield, disease-resistant, semi-dwarf wheat.secondnameplaceholder said that his first few years in Mexico were difficult. He lacked trained scientists and equipment. Local farmers were hostile towards the wheat program because of serious crop losses from 1939 to 1941 due to stem rust. "It often appeared to me that I had made a dreadful mistake in accepting the position in Mexico," he wrote in the epilogue to his book, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder on World Hunger.[17] He spent the first ten years breeding wheat cultivars resistant to disease, including rust. In that time, his group made 6,000 individual crossings of wheat.[23]Initially, secondnameplaceholder's work had been concentrated in the central highlands, in the village of Chapingo near Texcoco, where the problems with rust and poor soil were most prevalent. The village never met their aims. He realized that he could speed up breeding by taking advantage of the country's two growing seasons. In the summer he would breed wheat in the central highlands as usual, then immediately take the seeds north to the Yaqui Valley research station near Ciudad Obregón, Sonora. The difference in altitudes and temperatures would allow more crops to be grown each year.[citation needed]secondnameplaceholder's boss, George Harrar, was against this expansion. Besides the extra costs of doubling the work, secondnameplaceholder's plan went against a then-held principle of agronomy that has since been disproved. It was believed that to store energy for germination before being planted, seeds needed a rest period after harvesting. When Harrar vetoed his plan, secondnameplaceholder resigned. Elvin Stakman, who was visiting the project, calmed the situation, talking secondnameplaceholder into withdrawing his resignation and Harrar into allowing the double wheat season. As of 1945, wheat would then be bred at locations 700 miles (1000 km) apart, 10 degrees apart in latitude, and 8500 feet (2600 m) apart in altitude. This was called "shuttle breeding".[24]As an unexpected benefit of the double wheat season, the new breeds did not have problems with photoperiodism. Normally, wheat varieties cannot adapt to new environments, due to the changing periods of sunlight. secondnameplaceholder later recalled, "As it worked out, in the north, we were planting when the days were getting shorter, at low elevation and high temperature. Then we'd take the seed from the best plants south and plant it at high elevation, when days were getting longer and there was lots of rain. Soon we had varieties that fit the whole range of conditions. That wasn't supposed to happen by the books".[23] This meant that the project would not need to start separate breeding programs for each geographic region of the planet.Because pure line (genotypically identical) plant varieties often only have one or a few major genes for disease resistance, and plant diseases such as rust are continuously producing new races that can overcome a pure line's resistance, multiple linear lines varieties were developed. Multiline varieties are mixtures of several phenotypically similar pure lines which each have different genes for disease resistance. By having similar heights, flowering and maturity dates, seed colors, and agronomic characteristics, they remain compatible with each other, and do not reduce yields when grown together on the field.[citation needed]In 1953, secondnameplaceholder extended this technique by suggesting that several pure lines with different resistance genes should be developed through backcross methods using one recurrent parent.[25] Backcrossing involves crossing a hybrid and subsequent generations with a recurrent parent. As a result, the genotype of the backcrossed progeny becomes increasingly similar to that of the recurrent parent. secondnameplaceholder's method would allow the various different disease-resistant genes from several donor parents to be transferred into a single recurrent parent. To make sure each line has different resistant genes, each donor parent is used in a separate backcross program. Between five and ten of these lines may then be mixed depending upon the races of pathogen present in the region. As this process is repeated, some lines will become susceptible to the pathogen. These lines can easily be replaced with new resistant lines.As new sources of resistance become available, new lines are developed. In this way, the loss of crops is kept to a minimum, because only one or a few lines become susceptible to a pathogen within a given season, and all other crops are unaffected by the disease. Because the disease would spread more slowly than if the entire population were susceptible, this also reduces the damage to susceptible lines. There is still the possibility that a new race of pathogen will develop to which all lines are susceptible, however.[26]Dwarfing is an important agronomic quality for wheat; dwarf plants produce thick stems. The cultivars secondnameplaceholder worked with had tall, thin stalks. Taller wheat grasses better compete for sunlight, but tend to collapse under the weight of the extra grain—a trait called lodging—from the rapid growth spurts induced by nitrogen fertilizer secondnameplaceholder used in the poor soil. To prevent this, he bred wheat to favor shorter, stronger stalks that could better support larger seed heads. In 1953, he acquired a Japanese dwarf variety of wheat called Norin 10 developed by the agronomist Gonjiro Inazuka in Iwate Prefecture, including ones which had been crossed with a high-yielding American cultivar called Brevor 14 by Orville Vogel.[27] Norin 10/Brevor 14 is semi-dwarf (one-half to two-thirds the height of standard varieties) and produces more stalks and thus more heads of grain per plant. Also, larger amounts of assimilate were partitioned into the actual grains, further increasing the yield. secondnameplaceholder crossbred the semi-dwarf Norin 10/Brevor 14 cultivar with his disease-resistant cultivars to produce wheat varieties that were adapted to tropical and sub-tropical climates.[28]secondnameplaceholder's new semi-dwarf, disease-resistant varieties, called Pitic 62 and Penjamo 62, changed the potential yield of spring wheat dramatically. By 1963, 95% of Mexico's wheat crops used the semi-dwarf varieties developed by secondnameplaceholder. That year, the harvest was six times larger than in 1944, the year secondnameplaceholder arrived in Mexico. Mexico had become fully self-sufficient in wheat production, and a net exporter of wheat.[29] Four other high-yield varieties were also released, in 1964: Lerma Rojo 64, Siete Cerros, Sonora 64, and Super X.
<h2>Expansion to South Asia: the Green Revolution</h2>
In 1961 to 1962, secondnameplaceholder's dwarf spring wheat strains were sent for multilocation testing in the International Wheat Rust Nursery, organized by the U.S. Department of Agriculture. In March 1962, a few of these strains were grown in the fields of the Indian Agricultural Research Institute in Pusa, New Delhi, India. In May 1962, M. S. Swaminathan, a member of IARI's wheat program, requested of Dr B. P. Pal, director of IARI, to arrange for the visit of secondnameplaceholder to India and to obtain a wide range of dwarf wheat seed possessing the Norin 10 dwarfing genes.[citation needed] The letter was forwarded to the Indian Ministry of Agriculture headed by Shri C. Subramaniam, which arranged with the Rockefeller Foundation for secondnameplaceholder's visit.In March 1963, the Rockefeller Foundation and the Mexican government sent secondnameplaceholder and Dr Robert Glenn Anderson to India to continue his work. He supplied 100 kg (220 lb) of seed from each of the four most promising strains and 630 promising selections in advanced generations to the IARI in October 1963, and test plots were subsequently planted at Delhi, Ludhiana, Pant Nagar, Kanpur, Pune and Indore.[citation needed] Anderson stayed as head of the Rockefeller Foundation Wheat Program in New Delhi until 1975.During the mid-1960s the Indian subcontinent was at war and experienced minor famine and starvation, which was limited partially by the U.S. shipping a fifth of its wheat production to India in 1966 & 1967.[22] The Indian and Pakistani bureaucracies and the region's cultural opposition to new agricultural techniques initially prevented secondnameplaceholder from fulfilling his desire to immediately plant the new wheat strains there. In 1965, as a response to food shortages, secondnameplaceholder imported 550 tons of seeds for the government.[17]Biologist Paul R. Ehrlich wrote in his 1968 bestseller The Population Bomb, "The battle to feed all of humanity is over ... In the 1970s and 1980s hundreds of millions of people will starve to death in spite of any crash programs embarked upon now." Ehrlich said, "I have yet to meet anyone familiar with the situation who thinks India will be self-sufficient in food by 1971," and "India couldn't possibly feed two hundred million more people by 1980."[30]In 1965, after extensive testing, secondnameplaceholder's team, under Anderson, began its effort by importing about 450 tons of Lerma Rojo and Sonora 64 semi-dwarf seed varieties: 250 tons went to Pakistan and 200 to India. They encountered many obstacles. Their first shipment of wheat was held up in Mexican customs and so it could not be shipped from the port at Guaymas in time for proper planting.[citation needed] Instead, it was sent via a 30-truck convoy from Mexico to the U.S. port in Los Angeles, encountering delays at the Mexico–United States border. Once the convoy entered the U.S., it had to take a detour, as the U.S. National Guard had closed the freeway due to the Watts riots in Los Angeles. When the seeds reached Los Angeles, a Mexican bank refused to honor Pakistan treasury's payment of US$100,000, because the check contained three misspelled words. Still, the seed was loaded onto a freighter destined for Bombay, India, and Karachi, Pakistan. Twelve hours into the freighter's voyage, war broke out between India and Pakistan over the Kashmir region. secondnameplaceholder received a telegram from the Pakistani minister of agriculture, Malik Khuda Bakhsh Bucha: "I'm sorry to hear you are having trouble with my check, but I've got troubles, too. Bombs are falling on my front lawn. Be patient, the money is in the bank ..."[17]These delays prevented secondnameplaceholder's group from conducting the germination tests needed to determine seed quality and proper seeding levels. They started planting immediately and often worked in sight of artillery flashes. A week later, secondnameplaceholder discovered that his seeds were germinating at less than half the normal rate.[citation needed] It later turned out that the seeds had been damaged in a Mexican warehouse by over-fumigation with a pesticide. He immediately ordered all locations to double their seeding rates.[31]The initial yields of secondnameplaceholder's crops were higher than any ever harvested in South Asia. The countries subsequently committed to importing large quantities of both the Lerma Rojo 64 and Sonora 64 varieties. In 1966, India imported 18,000 tons—the largest purchase and import of any seed in the world at that time. In 1967, Pakistan imported 42,000 tons, and Turkey 21,000 tons. Pakistan's import, planted on 1.5 million acres (6,100 km2), produced enough wheat to seed the entire nation's wheatland the following year.[22] By 1968, when Ehrlich's book was released, William Gaud of the United States Agency for International Development was calling secondnameplaceholder's work a "Green Revolution". High yields led to a shortage of various utilities—labor to harvest the crops, bullock carts to haul it to the threshing floor, jute bags, trucks, rail cars, and grain storage facilities. Some local governments were forced to close school buildings temporarily to use them for grain storage.[17]In Pakistan, wheat yields nearly doubled, from 4.6 million tons in 1965 to 7.3 million tons in 1970; Pakistan was self-sufficient in wheat production by 1968.[citation needed] Yields were over 21 million tons by 2000. In India, yields increased from 12.3 million tons in 1965 to 20.1 million tons in 1970. By 1974, India was self-sufficient in the production of all cereals. By 2000, India was harvesting a record 76.4 million tons (2.81 billion bushels) of wheat. Since the 1960s, food production in both nations has increased faster than the rate of population growth.[citation needed] India's use of high-yield farming has prevented an estimated 100 million acres (400,000 km2) of virgin land from being converted into farmland—an area about the size of California, or 13.6% of the total area of India.[32] The use of these wheat varieties has also had a substantial effect on production in six Latin American countries, six countries in the Near and Middle East, and several others in Africa.[citation needed]secondnameplaceholder's work with wheat contributed to the development of high-yield semi-dwarf indica and japonica rice cultivars at the International Rice Research Institute and China's Hunan Rice Research Institute. secondnameplaceholder's colleagues at the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research also developed and introduced a high-yield variety of rice throughout most of Asia. Land devoted to the semi-dwarf wheat and rice varieties in Asia expanded from 200 acres (0.8 km2) in 1965 to over 40 million acres (160,000 km2) in 1970. In 1970, this land accounted for over 10% of the more productive cereal land in Asia.[22]For his contributions to the world food supply, secondnameplaceholder was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1970. Norwegian officials notified his wife in Mexico City at 4:00 am, but secondnameplaceholder had already left for the test fields in the Toluca valley, about 40 miles (65 km) west of Mexico City. A chauffeur took her to the fields to inform her husband. According to his daughter, Jeanie Laube, "My mom said, 'You won the Nobel Peace Prize,' and he said, 'No, I haven't', ... It took some convincing ... He thought the whole thing was a hoax".[17] He was awarded the prize on December 10.In his Nobel Lecture the following day, he speculated on his award: "When the Nobel Peace Prize Committee designated me the recipient of the 1970 award for my contribution to the 'green revolution', they were in effect, I believe, selecting an individual to symbolize the vital role of agriculture and food production in a world that is hungry, both for bread and for peace".[33] His speech repeatedly presented improvements in food production within a sober understanding of the context of population.  "The green revolution has won a temporary success in man's war against hunger and deprivation; it has given man a breathing space. If fully implemented, the revolution can provide sufficient food for sustenance during the next three decades. But the frightening power of human reproduction must also be curbed; otherwise the success of the green revolution will be ephemeral only."Most people still fail to comprehend the magnitude and menace of the "Population Monster"...Since man is potentially a rational being, however, I am confident that within the next two decades he will recognize the self-destructive course he steers along the road of irresponsible population growth..."[34]secondnameplaceholder continually advocated increasing crop yields as a means to curb deforestation. The large role he played in both increasing crop yields and promoting this view has led to this methodology being called by agricultural economists the "secondnameplaceholder hypothesis", namely that increasing the productivity of agriculture on the best farmland can help control deforestation by reducing the demand for new farmland. According to this view, assuming that global food demand is on the rise, restricting crop usage to traditional low-yield methods would also require at least one of the following: the world population to decrease, either voluntarily or as a result of mass starvations; or the conversion of forest land into crop land. It is thus argued that high-yield techniques are ultimately saving ecosystems from destruction. On a global scale, this view holds strictly true ceteris paribus, if deforestation only occurs to increase land for agriculture. But other land uses exist, such as urban areas, pasture, or fallow, so further research is necessary to ascertain what land has been converted for what purposes, to determine how true this view remains.[according to whom?]Increased profits from high-yield production may also induce cropland expansion in any case, although as world food needs decrease, this expansion may decrease as well.[35]secondnameplaceholder expressed the idea now known as the "secondnameplaceholder hypothesis" in a speech given in Oslo, Norway, in 2000, upon the occasion of the 30th anniversary of his acceptance of the Nobel Peace Prize: "Had the global cereal yields of 1950 still prevailed in 1999, we would have needed nearly 1.8 billion ha of additional land of the same quality – instead of the 600 million that was used – to equal the current global harvest".[36]secondnameplaceholder's name is nearly synonymous with the Green Revolution, against which many criticisms have been mounted over the decades by environmentalists and some nutritionists[who?]. Throughout his years of research, secondnameplaceholder's programs often faced opposition by nonscientists who consider genetic crossbreeding to be unnatural or to have negative effects.[37] secondnameplaceholder's work has been criticized for bringing large-scale monoculture, input-intensive farming techniques to countries that had previously relied on subsistence farming to support smaller populations.[38][failed verification] These farming techniques, in addition to increasing yields, often reaped large profits for U.S. agribusiness and agrochemical corporations and were criticized by one author in 2003 as widening social inequality in the countries owing to uneven food distribution while forcing a capitalist agenda of U.S. corporations onto countries that had undergone land reform.[39][improper synthesis?]Other concerns of his critics and critics of biotechnology in general include: that the construction of roads in populated third-world areas could lead to the destruction of wilderness; the crossing of genetic barriers; the inability of a single crop to fulfill all nutritional requirements; the decreased biodiversity from planting a small number of varieties; the environmental and economic effects of inorganic fertilizer and pesticides; and the side effects of large amounts of herbicides sprayed on fields of herbicide-resistant crops.[40]secondnameplaceholder refuted or dismissed most claims of his critics, but did take certain concerns seriously. He stated that his work has been "a change in the right direction, but it has not transformed the world into a Utopia".[41] Of environmental lobbyists opposing crop yield improvements, he stated, "some of the environmental lobbyists of the Western nations are the salt of the earth, but many of them are elitists. They've never experienced the physical sensation of hunger. They do their lobbying from comfortable office suites in Washington or Brussels. If they lived just one month amid the misery of the developing world, as I have for fifty years, they'd be crying out for tractors and fertilizer and irrigation canals and be outraged that fashionable elitists back home were trying to deny them these things".[42]
<h2>Later roles</h2>
Following his retirement, secondnameplaceholder continued to participate in teaching, research and activism. He spent much of the year based at CIMMYT in Mexico, conducting research, and four months of the year serving at Texas A&M University, where he had been a distinguished professor of international agriculture since 1984. From 1994 to 2003, secondnameplaceholder served on the International Fertilizer Development Center board of directors. In 1999, the university's Board of Regents named its US$16 million Center for Southern Crop Improvement in honor of secondnameplaceholder. He worked in the building's Heep Center, and taught one semester each year.[17]In the early 1980s, environmental groups that were opposed to secondnameplaceholder's methods campaigned against his planned expansion of efforts into Africa. They prompted the Rockefeller and Ford Foundations and the World Bank to stop funding most of his African agriculture projects. Western European governments were persuaded to stop supplying fertilizer to Africa. According to David Seckler, former Director General of the International Water Management Institute, "the environmental community in the 1980s went crazy pressuring the donor countries and the big foundations not to support ideas like inorganic fertilizers for Africa."[32]In 1984, during the Ethiopian famine, Ryoichi Sasakawa, the chairman of the Japan Shipbuilding Industry Foundation (now the Nippon Foundation), contacted the semi-retired secondnameplaceholder, wondering why the methods used in Asia were not extended to Africa, and hoping secondnameplaceholder could help. He managed to convince secondnameplaceholder to help with this new effort,[43] and subsequently founded the Sasakawa Africa Association (SAA) to coordinate the project.The SAA is a research and extension organization that aims to increase food production in African countries that are struggling with food shortages. "I assumed we'd do a few years of research first," secondnameplaceholder later recalled, "but after I saw the terrible circumstances there, I said, 'Let's just start growing'."[32] Soon, secondnameplaceholder and the SAA had projects in seven countries. Yields of maize in developed African countries tripled. Yields of wheat, sorghum, cassava, and cowpeas also increased in these countries.[32] At present (more than ten years after secondnameplaceholder's death in 2009), program activities are under way in Benin, Burkina Faso, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Mali, Malawi, Mozambique, Nigeria, Tanzania, and Uganda, all of which suffered from repeated famines in previous decades.From 1986 to 2009, secondnameplaceholder was the President of the SAA. That year, a joint venture between The Carter Center and SAA was launched called Sasakawa-Global 2000 (SG 2000).[44] The program focuses on food, population and agricultural policy.[45] Since then, more than 8 million small-scale farmers in 15 African countries have been trained in SAA farming techniques, which have helped them to double or triple grain production.[46] Those elements that allowed secondnameplaceholder's projects to succeed in India and Pakistan, such as well-organized market economies, transportation, and irrigation systems, are severely lacking throughout much of Africa, posing additional obstacles to increasing yields and reducing the ongoing threat of food shortages. Because of these challenges, secondnameplaceholder's initial projects were restricted to relatively developed regions of the continent.Despite these setbacks, secondnameplaceholder found encouragement. Visiting Ethiopia in 1994 after a major famine, Jimmy Carter won Prime Minister Meles Zenawi's support for a campaign seeking to aid farmers, using the fertilizer diammonium phosphate and secondnameplaceholder's methods. The following season, Ethiopia recorded the largest harvests of major crops in history, with a 32% increase in production, and a 15% increase in average yield over the previous season. For secondnameplaceholder, the rapid increase in yields suggested that there was still hope for higher food production throughout sub-Saharan Africa,[32] despite lingering questions about population sustainability and the absence of long-term studies in Africa.The World Food Prize is an international award recognizing the achievements of individuals who have advanced human development by improving the quality, quantity or availability of food in the world. The prize was created in 1986 by firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, as a way to recognize personal accomplishments, and as a means of education by using the Prize to establish role models for others. The first prize was given to secondnameplaceholder's former colleague, M. S. Swaminathan, in 1987, for his work in India. The next year, Swaminathan used the US$250,000 prize to start the MS Swaminathan Research Foundation for research on sustainable development.At the DuPont Agriculture & Nutrition Media Day held in Des Moines, Iowa, on September 25, 2000, secondnameplaceholder announced the launch of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder University, an Internet-based learning company for agriculture and food industry personnel. The university was unable to expand the necessary content or customer base, and since late 2001 has been defunct.The limited potential for land expansion for cultivation worried secondnameplaceholder, who, in March 2005, stated that, "we will have to double the world food supply by 2050." With 85% of future growth in food production having to come from lands already in use, he recommends a multidisciplinary research focus to further increase yields, mainly through increased crop immunity to large-scale diseases, such as the rust fungus, which affects all cereals but rice. His dream was to "transfer rice immunity to cereals such as wheat, maize, sorghum and barley, and transfer bread-wheat proteins (gliadin and glutenin) to other cereals, especially rice and maize".[47]In 2005 in Kenya, secondnameplaceholder convened an international expert panel on the emerging threat of Ug99 in east Africa, which eventually became the Global Rust Initiative. In 2008, the organization was named the secondnameplaceholder Global Rust Initiative.[48]secondnameplaceholder believed that genetically modified organisms (GMO) was the only way to increase food production as the world runs out of unused arable land. GMOs were not inherently dangerous "because we've been genetically modifying plants and animals for a long time. Long before we called it science, people were selecting the best breeds."[49]
In a review of secondnameplaceholder's 2000 publication entitled Ending world hunger: the promise of biotechnology and the threat of antiscience zealotry,[50] the authors argued that secondnameplaceholder's warnings were still true in 2010,[51]According to secondnameplaceholder, "Africa, the former Soviet republics, and the cerrado are the last frontiers. After they are in use, the world will have no additional sizable blocks of arable land left to put into production, unless you are willing to level whole forests, which you should not do. So, future food-production increases will have to come from higher yields. And though I have no doubt yields will keep going up, whether they can go up enough to feed the population monster is another matter. Unless progress with agricultural yields remains very strong, the next century will experience sheer human misery that, on a numerical scale, will exceed the worst of everything that has come before".[32]Besides increasing the worldwide food supply, early in his career secondnameplaceholder stated that taking steps to decrease the rate of population growth will also be necessary to prevent food shortages. In his Nobel Lecture of 1970, secondnameplaceholder stated, "Most people still fail to comprehend the magnitude and menace of the 'Population Monster' ... If it continues to increase at the estimated present rate of two percent a year, the world population will reach 6.5 billion by the year 2000. Currently, with each second, or tick of the clock, about 2.2 additional people are added to the world population. The rhythm of increase will accelerate to 2.7, 3.3, and 4.0 for each tick of the clock by 1980, 1990, and 2000, respectively, unless man becomes more realistic and preoccupied about this impending doom. The tick-tock of the clock will continually grow louder and more menacing each decade. Where will it all end?"[33] However, some observers have suggested that by the 1990s secondnameplaceholder had changed his position on population control. They point to a quote from the year 2000 in which he stated: "I now say that the world has the technology—either available or well advanced in the research pipeline—to feed on a sustainable basis a population of 10 billion people. The more pertinent question today is whether farmers and ranchers will be permitted to use this new technology? While the affluent nations can certainly afford to adopt ultra low-risk positions, and pay more for food produced by the so-called 'organic' methods, the one billion chronically undernourished people of the low income, food-deficit nations cannot."[52] However, secondnameplaceholder remained on the advisory board of Population Media Center, an organization working to stabilize world population, until his death.[53]
<h2>Death</h2>
secondnameplaceholder died of lymphoma at the age of 95, on September 12, 2009, in his Dallas home.[3][54]secondnameplaceholder's children released a statement saying, "We would like his life to be a model for making a difference in the lives of others and to bring about efforts to end human misery for all mankind."[55]The Prime Minister of India Manmohan Singh and President of India Pratibha Patil paid tribute to secondnameplaceholder saying, "secondnameplaceholder's life and achievement are testimony to the far-reaching contribution that one man's towering intellect, persistence and scientific vision can make to human peace and progress."[56]The United Nations' Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) described secondnameplaceholder as "a towering scientist whose work rivals that of the 20th century's other great scientific benefactors of humankind"[57] and Kofi Annan, former Secretary-General of the United Nations said, "As we celebrate Dr. secondnameplaceholder's long and remarkable life, we also celebrate the long and productive lives that his achievements have made possible for so many millions of people around the world... we will continue to be inspired by his enduring devotion to the poor, needy and vulnerable of our world."[58]
<h2>Honors and awards</h2>
In 1968, secondnameplaceholder received what he considered an especially satisfying tribute when the people of Ciudad Obregón, where some of his earliest experiments were undertaken, named a street after him. Also in that year, he became a member of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences.In 1970, he was given an honorary doctorate by the Agricultural University of Norway.[59]In 1970, he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize by the Norwegian Nobel Committee "for his contributions to the 'green revolution' that was having such an impact on food production particularly in Asia and in Latin America."[59]In 1971, he was named a Distinguished Fellow of the National Academy of Agronomy and Veterinary Medicine of Argentina[60]In 1971, he received the American Academy of Achievement's Golden Plate Award.[61]In 1974, he was awarded a Peace Medal (in the form of a dove, carrying a wheat ear in its beak) by Haryana Agricultural University, Hisar, India.In 1975, he was named a Distinguished Fellow of the Iowa Academy of Science.[62]In 1980, he received the S. Roger Horchow Award for Greatest Public Service by a Private Citizen, an award given out annually by Jefferson Awards.[63]In 1980, he was elected honorary member of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences.In 1984, his name was placed in the National Agricultural Hall of Fame at the national center in Bonner Springs, Kansas. Also that year, he was recognized for sustained service to humanity through outstanding contributions in plant breeding from the Governors Conference on Agriculture Innovations in Little Rock, Arkansas. Also in 1984, he received the Henry G. Bennet Distinguished Service Award at commencement ceremonies at Oklahoma State University. He recently received the Charles A. Black Award for his contributions to public policy and the public understanding of science.In 1985, the University of Minnesota named a wing of the new science building in secondnameplaceholder's honor, calling it "secondnameplaceholder Hall."In 1986, secondnameplaceholder was inducted into the Scandinavian-American Hall of Fame during Norsk Høstfest.[64]secondnameplaceholder was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 1987.[2][65]In 2012, a new elementary school in the Iowa City, IA school district opened, called "firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Elementary".On 19 August 2013, his statue was unveiled inside the ICAR's NASC Complex at New Delhi, India.[66]On 25 March 2014, a statue of secondnameplaceholder at the United States Capitol was unveiled in a ceremony on the 100th anniversary of his birth.  This statue replaces the statue of James Harlan as one of the two statues given to the National Statuary Hall Collection by the state of Iowa.In addition to the Nobel Prize, secondnameplaceholder received the 1977 U.S. Presidential Medal of Freedom, the 2002 Public Welfare Medal from the National Academy of Sciences,[67] the 2002 Rotary International Award for World Understanding and Peace, and the 2004 National Medal of Science. As of January 2004, secondnameplaceholder had received 49 honorary degrees from as many universities, in 18 countries, the most recent from Dartmouth College on June 12, 2005,[68] and was a foreign or honorary member of 22 international Academies of Sciences.[69] In Iowa and Minnesota, "World Food Day", October 16, is referred to as "firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder World Food Prize Day". Throughout the United States, it is referred to as "World Food Prize Day".In 2006, the Government of India conferred on him its second highest civilian award: the Padma Vibhushan.[70] He was awarded the Danforth Award for Plant Science by the Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, St Louis, Missouri in recognition of his lifelong commitment to increasing global agricultural production through plant science.Several research institutions and buildings have been named in his honor, including: the firstnameplaceholder E. secondnameplaceholder Center for Farmer Training and Education, Santa Cruz de la Sierra, Bolivia, in 1983; secondnameplaceholder Hall, on the St. Paul Campus of the University of Minnesota in 1985; secondnameplaceholder Building at the International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center (CIMMYT) headquarters in 1986; the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Institute for Plant Science Research at De Montfort University, Leicester, United Kingdom in 1997; and the firstnameplaceholder E. secondnameplaceholder Center for Southern Crop Improvement, at Texas A&M University in 1999; and the secondnameplaceholder Institute for South Asia (BISA) in 2011. In 2006, the Texas A&M University System created the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Institute for International Agriculture[citation needed] to be a premier institution for agricultural development and to continue the legacy of Dr. secondnameplaceholder.The stained-glass World Peace Window at St. Mark's Episcopal Cathedral in Minneapolis, Minnesota, depicts "peace makers" of the 20th century, including firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder.[71] secondnameplaceholder was also prominently mentioned in an episode ("In This White House") of the TV show The West Wing. The president of a fictional African country describes the kind of "miracle" needed to save his country from the ravages of AIDS by referencing an American scientist who was able to save the world from hunger through the development of a new type of wheat. The U.S. president replies by providing secondnameplaceholder's name.secondnameplaceholder was also featured in an episode of Penn & Teller: Bullshit!, where he was referred to as the "Greatest Human Being That Ever Lived". In that episode, Penn & Teller play a card game where each card depicts a great person in history. Each player picks a few cards at random, and bets on whether one thinks one's card shows a greater person than the other players' cards based on a characterization such as humanitarianism or scientific achievement. Penn gets firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, and proceeds to bet all his chips, his house, his rings, his watch, and essentially everything he's ever owned. He wins because, as he says, "firstnameplaceholder is the greatest human being, and you've probably never heard of him." In the episode—the topic of which was genetically altered food—he is credited with saving the lives of over a billion people.[72]In August 2006, Dr. Leon Hesser published The Man Who Fed the World: Nobel Peace Prize Laureate firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder and His Battle to End World Hunger, an account of secondnameplaceholder's life and work. On August 4, the book received the 2006 Print of Peace award, as part of International Read For Peace Week.On September 27, 2006, the United States Senate by unanimous consent passed the Congressional Tribute to Dr. firstnameplaceholder E. secondnameplaceholder Act of 2006. The act authorizes that secondnameplaceholder be awarded America's highest civilian award, the Congressional Gold Medal. On December 6, 2006, the House of Representatives passed the measure by voice vote. President George Bush signed the bill into law on December 14, 2006, and it became Public Law Number 109–395.[73] According to the act, "the number of lives Dr. secondnameplaceholder has saved [is] more than a billion people" The act authorizes the Secretary of the Treasury to strike and sell duplicates of the medal in bronze.[74] He was presented with the medal on July 17, 2007.[75]secondnameplaceholder was a foreign fellow of the Bangladesh Academy of Sciences.[76]The secondnameplaceholder Dialogue (firstnameplaceholder E. secondnameplaceholder International Symposium) is named in his honour.
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (German: [ˈvɪliː ˈbʁant] (listen); born Herbert Ernst Karl Frahm; 18 December 1913 – 8 October 1992) was a German politician and statesman who was leader of the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) from 1964 to 1987 and served as Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany) from 1969 to 1974.He was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1971 for his efforts to strengthen cooperation in western Europe through the EEC and to achieve reconciliation between West Germany and the countries of Eastern Europe.[1] He was the first Social Democrat chancellor[2] since 1930.Fleeing to Norway and then Sweden during the Nazi regime and working as a left-wing journalist, he took the name firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder as a pseudonym to avoid detection by Nazi agents, and then formally adopted the name in 1948. secondnameplaceholder was originally considered one of the leaders of the right wing of the SPD, and earned initial fame as Governing Mayor of West Berlin. He served as Foreign Minister and as Vice Chancellor in Kurt Georg Kiesinger's cabinet, and became chancellor in 1969.As chancellor, he maintained West Germany's close alignment with the United States and focused on strengthening European integration in western Europe, while launching the new policy of Ostpolitik aimed at improving relations with Eastern Europe. secondnameplaceholder was controversial on both the right wing, for his Ostpolitik, and on the left wing, for his support of American policies, including the Vietnam War, and right-wing authoritarian regimes. The secondnameplaceholder Report became a recognised measure for describing the general North-South divide in world economics and politics between an affluent North and a poor South. secondnameplaceholder was also known for his fierce anti-communist policies at the domestic level, culminating in the Radikalenerlass (Anti-Radical Decree) in 1972.secondnameplaceholder resigned as chancellor in 1974, after Günter Guillaume, one of his closest aides, was exposed as an agent of the Stasi, the East German secret service.
<h2>Early life and the Second World War</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was born Herbert Ernst Karl Frahm in the Free City of Lübeck (German Empire) on 18 December 1913.[3] His mother was Martha Frahm (16 March 1894 – 3 August 1969)[citation needed] a single parent, who worked as a cashier for a department store. His father was a teacher from Hamburg named John Heinrich Möller (1887–1958)[4] whom secondnameplaceholder never met. As his mother worked six days a week, he was mainly brought up by his mother's stepfather, Ludwig Frahm (1875–1935), and his second wife, Dora.[citation needed]He joined the "Socialist Youth" in 1929 and the Social Democratic Party (SPD) in 1930. He left the SPD to join the more left wing Socialist Workers Party (SAP), which was allied to the POUM in Spain and the Independent Labour Party in Britain. After passing his Abitur in 1932 at Johanneum zu Lübeck, he became an apprentice at the shipbroker and ship's agent F. H. Bertling. In 1933, using his connections with the port and its ships, he left Germany for Norway to escape Nazi persecution. It was at this time that he adopted the pseudonym firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder to avoid detection by Nazi agents. In 1934, he took part in the founding of the International Bureau of Revolutionary Youth Organizations, and was elected to its secretariat.[citation needed]secondnameplaceholder was in Germany from September to December 1936, disguised as a Norwegian student named Gunnar Gaasland. The real Gunnar Gaasland was married to Gertrud Meyer from Lübeck in a marriage of convenience to protect her from deportation. Meyer had joined secondnameplaceholder in Norway in July 1933. In 1937, during the Spanish Civil War, secondnameplaceholder worked in Spain as a journalist. In 1938, the German government revoked his citizenship, so he applied for Norwegian citizenship. In 1940, he was arrested in Norway by occupying German forces, but was not identified as he wore a Norwegian uniform.On his release, he escaped to neutral Sweden. In August 1940, he became a Norwegian citizen, receiving his passport from the Norwegian legation in Stockholm, where he lived until the end of the war. firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder lectured in Sweden on 1 December 1940 at Bommersvik College about problems experienced by the social democrats in Nazi Germany and the occupied countries at the start of the Second World War. In exile in Norway and Sweden, secondnameplaceholder learned Norwegian and Swedish. secondnameplaceholder spoke Norwegian fluently, and retained a close relationship with Norway.[citation needed]In late 1946, secondnameplaceholder returned to Berlin, working for the Norwegian government. In 1948, he joined the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) and became a German citizen again, formally adopting the pseudonym firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder as his legal name.
<h2>Politician</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was elected to the West German Bundestag (the federal parliament) in the 1949 West German federal election as a SPD delegate from West Berlin, serving there until 1957. Concurrently, he was elected as an SPD representative to the Abgeordnetenhaus (the state-level parliament) of West Berlin in the 1950 West Berlin state election, and served there through 1971. In the 1969 West German federal election he was again elected to the Bundestag, but as a delegate from North Rhine-Westphalia, and remained in the Bundestag as a delegate from that state until his death in 1992.[5]In 1950, secondnameplaceholder, while a member of the Bundestag and the editor-in-chief of the Berliner Stadtblatt, received a secret payment of about 170,000 Deutsche Mark from the U.S. government (equivalent to €425,367 in 2017).[6] He denied any contribution to the topic.From 3 October 1957 to 1966, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder served as Governing Mayor of West Berlin, during a period of increasing tension in East-West relations that led to the construction of the Berlin Wall. In secondnameplaceholder's first year as mayor of Berlin, he also served as the president of the Bundesrat in Bonn. secondnameplaceholder was an outspoken critic of Soviet repression of the 1956 Hungarian Uprising and of Nikita Khrushchev's 1958 proposal that Berlin receive the status of a "free city". He was supported by the influential publisher Axel Springer.As mayor of West Berlin, secondnameplaceholder accomplished much in the way of urban development. New hotels, office-blocks and flats were constructed, while both Schloss Charlottenburg and the Reichstag building were restored. Sections of the "Stadtring" Bundesautobahn 100 inner city motorway were opened, while a major housing programme was carried out, with roughly 20,000 new dwellings built each year during his time in office.[7]At the start of 1961, U.S. President John F. Kennedy saw secondnameplaceholder as a figure destined for high office in West Germany and was hoping he would replace Konrad Adenauer as chancellor following elections later that year.[8] Kennedy made this preference clear by inviting secondnameplaceholder, the West German opposition leader, to an official meeting at the White House a month before meeting with Adenauer, the country's leader. For the president, secondnameplaceholder stood for Germany's future and for overcoming traditional Cold War thinking.[9]The diplomatic snub strained relations between Kennedy and Adenauer further during an especially tense time for Berlin.[10] However, following the building of the Berlin Wall in August 1961, secondnameplaceholder was disappointed and angry with Kennedy. Speaking in Berlin three days later, secondnameplaceholder criticized Kennedy, asserting "Berlin expects more than words. It expects political action." He also wrote Kennedy a highly critical public letter in which he warned that the development was liable "to arouse doubts about the ability of the three [Allied] Powers to react and their determination" and he called the situation "a state of accomplished extortion".[11] Kennedy was furious, but managed to diffuse the tension by sending his vice president, Lyndon B. Johnson, to Berlin.[12] In June 1963, secondnameplaceholder figured prominently in the staging of Kennedy's triumphant visit to West Berlin.[13]secondnameplaceholder became the chairman of the SPD in 1964, a post that he retained until 1987, longer than any other party chairman since the founding of the SPD by August Bebel. secondnameplaceholder was the SPD candidate for the chancellorship in 1961, but he lost to Konrad Adenauer's conservative Christian Democratic Union of Germany (CDU). In 1965, secondnameplaceholder ran again, but lost to the popular Ludwig Erhard. Erhard's government was short-lived, however, and in 1966 a grand coalition between the SPD and CDU was formed, with secondnameplaceholder serving as foreign minister and as the 5th Vice-Chancellor of Germany.
<h2>Chancellor</h2>
At the 1969 elections, again with secondnameplaceholder as the leading candidate, the SPD became stronger, and after three weeks of negotiations, the SPD formed a coalition government with the smaller Free Democratic Party of Germany (FDP). secondnameplaceholder was elected Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany.As chancellor, secondnameplaceholder developed his Neue Ostpolitik (New Eastern Policy) by stages. secondnameplaceholder was active in creating a degree of rapprochement with East Germany, and also in improving relations with the Soviet Union, Poland, Czechoslovakia, and other Eastern Bloc (communist) countries.secondnameplaceholder introduced his Ostpolitik gradually starting in 1967 with the establishment of diplomatic relations with Romania and making a trade agreement with Czechoslovakia. In 1968 he restored diplomatic relations with Yugoslavia. However the August 1968, Kremlin-controlled invasion of Czechoslovakia by the Warsaw Pact was a profound disappointment. secondnameplaceholder condemned the invasion and put Ostpolitik on hold while he negotiated a coalition with the Free Democrats. In late 1969 he indicated his readiness to meet with East German leadership on the basis of equality, without preconditions. He also expressed an eagerness to meet with the USSR and Poland to resolve frontier questions that had remained unsettled since 1945. secondnameplaceholder met with the East German premier Willi Stoph in 1970.secondnameplaceholder made a six-point proposal that would involve two separate German states that respected each other's territorial integrity and settle disputes peacefully. They would cooperate as neighbors and the rights of the Four Powers in Berlin would be respected by both of them, and finally that the situation around Berlin would be improved. No agreements were reached at first but talks continued. In 1970 secondnameplaceholder signed a treaty with the Soviet Union which normalised relations and recognized existing national boundaries. The treaty with Poland in December 1970 accepted the current boundaries, which had long been in dispute. During a visit to a monument to the German occupation-era Warsaw Ghetto Uprising, secondnameplaceholder unexpectedly, and apparently spontaneously, knelt (Kniefall von Warschau), honoring the victims. This was met with a strong positive reaction worldwide, but was highly controversial in the German public at the time.The Berlin question was settled in 1971 to West Germany's satisfaction. The crowning step came with the Basic Treaty with East Germany.  The status quo was legitimized, relations were formalized on the basis of equality, and both Germanies joined the United Nations in 1973.[14]  secondnameplaceholder became the first German chancellor to address the United Nations General Assembly.Time magazine in the U.S. named secondnameplaceholder as its Man of the Year for 1970, stating, "firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder is in effect seeking to end World War II by bringing about a fresh relationship between East and West. He is trying to accept the real situation in Europe, which has lasted for 25 years, but he is also trying to bring about a new reality in his bold approach to the Soviet Union and the East Bloc."[15] President Richard Nixon also was pushing détente on behalf of the United States. The Nixon policies amounted to co-opting secondnameplaceholder's Ostpolitik.[16]In 1971, secondnameplaceholder received the Nobel Peace Prize for his work in improving relations with East Germany, Poland, and the Soviet Union. secondnameplaceholder negotiated a peace treaty with Poland, and agreements on the boundaries between the two countries, signifying the official and long-delayed end of World War II. secondnameplaceholder negotiated parallel treaties and agreements with Czechoslovakia.In West Germany, secondnameplaceholder's Neue Ostpolitik was extremely controversial, dividing the populace into two camps. One camp embraced all of the conservative parties, and most notably those West German residents and their families who had been driven west ("die Heimatvertriebenen") by Stalinist ethnic cleansing from Historical Eastern Germany, especially the part that was given to Poland as a consequence of the end of the war; western Czechoslovakia (the Sudetenland); and the rest of Eastern Europe, such as in Romania. These groups of displaced Germans and their descendants loudly voiced their opposition to secondnameplaceholder's policy, calling it "illegal" and "high treason".A different camp supported and encouraged secondnameplaceholder's Neue Ostpolitik as aiming at "Wandel durch Annäherung" ("change through rapprochement"), encouraging change through a policy of engagement with the (communist) Eastern Bloc, rather than trying to isolate those countries diplomatically and commercially. secondnameplaceholder's supporters claim that the policy did help to break down the Eastern Bloc's "siege mentality", and also helped to increase its awareness of the contradictions in its brand of Socialism/Communism, which – together with other events – eventually led to the downfall of Eastern European Communism.secondnameplaceholder's predecessor as chancellor, Kurt Georg Kiesinger, had been a member of the Nazi party, and was a more old-fashioned conservative-liberal intellectual. secondnameplaceholder, having fought the Nazis and having faced down communist Eastern Germany during several crises while he was the mayor of Berlin, became a controversial, but credible, figure in several different factions. As the Minister of Foreign Affairs in Kiesinger's grand coalition cabinet, secondnameplaceholder helped to gain further international approval for Western Germany, and he laid the foundation stones for his future Neue Ostpolitik. There was a wide public-opinion gap between Kiesinger and secondnameplaceholder in the West German polls.Both men had come to their own terms with the new baby boomer lifestyles. Kiesinger considered them to be "a shameful crowd of long-haired drop-outs who needed a bath and someone to discipline them". On the other hand, secondnameplaceholder needed a while to get into contact with, and to earn credibility among, the "Ausserparlamentarische Opposition" (APO) ("the extra-parliamentary opposition"). The students questioned West German society in general, seeking social, legal, and political reforms. The unrest led to a renaissance of right-wing parties in some of the Bundeslands' (German states under the Bundesrepublik) Parliaments.secondnameplaceholder, however, represented a figure of change, and he followed a course of social, legal, and political reforms. In 1969, secondnameplaceholder gained a small majority by forming a coalition with the FDP. In his first speech before the Bundestag as the chancellor, secondnameplaceholder set forth his political course of reforms ending the speech with his famous words, "Wir wollen mehr Demokratie wagen" (literally: "Let's dare more democracy", or more figuratively, "We want to take a chance on more Democracy"). This speech made secondnameplaceholder, as well as the Social Democratic Party, popular among most of the students and other young West German baby-boomers who dreamed of a country that would be more open and more colorful than the frugal and still somewhat-authoritarian Bundesrepublik that had been built after World War II. However, secondnameplaceholder's Neue Ostpolitik lost him a large part of the German refugee voters from East Germany, who had been significantly pro-SPD in the postwar years.Although secondnameplaceholder is perhaps best known for his achievements in foreign policy, his government oversaw the implementation of a broad range of social reforms, and was known as a "Kanzler der inneren Reformen" ('Chancellor of domestic reform').[17] According to the historian David Childs, "secondnameplaceholder was anxious that his government should be a reforming administration and a number of reforms were embarked upon".[18] Within a few years, the education budget rose from 16 billion to 50 billion DM, while one out of every three DM spent by the new government was devoted to welfare purposes. As noted by the journalist and historian Marion Dönhoff,"People were seized by a completely new feeling about life. A mania for large scale reforms spread like wildfire, affecting schools, universities, the administration, family legislation. In the autumn of 1970 Hans-Jürgen Wischnewski of the SPD declared, 'Every week more than three plans for reform come up for decision in cabinet and in the Assembly.'"[19]According to Helmut Schmidt, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's domestic reform programme had accomplished more than any previous programme for a comparable period.[20] Levels of social expenditure were increased,[21] with more funds allocated towards housing, transportation, schools, and communication,[22] and substantial federal benefits were provided for farmers.[23] Various measures were introduced to extend health care coverage,[24] while federal aid to sports organisations was increased.[23] A number of liberal social reforms were instituted[25] whilst the welfare state was significantly expanded[26] (with total public spending on social programs nearly doubling between 1969 and 1975),[27] with health, housing, and social welfare legislation bringing about welcome improvements,[23] and by the end of the secondnameplaceholder Chancellorship West Germany had one of the most advanced systems of welfare in the world.[17]Substantial increases were made in social security benefits such as injury and sickness benefits,[17] pensions,[28] unemployment benefits,[17][29] housing allowances,[30] basic subsistence aid allowances,[31] and family allowances and living allowances.[32] In the government's first budget, sickness benefits were increased by 9.3%, pensions for war widows by 25%, pensions for the war wounded by 16%, and retirement pensions by 5%.[22] Numerically, pensions went up by 6.4% (1970), 5.5% (1971), 9.5% (1972), 11.4% (1973), and 11.2% (1974). Adjusted for changes in the annual price index, pensions went up in real terms by 3.1% (1970), 0.3% (1971), 3.9% (1972), 4.4% (1973), and 4.2% (1974).[33] Between 1972 and 1974, the purchasing power of pensioners went up by 19%.[34] In 1970, war pensions were increased by 16%.[35] War victim's pensions went up by 5.5% in January 1971, and by 6.3% in January 1972. By 1972, war pensions for orphans and parents had gone up by around 40%, and for widows by around 50%. Between 1970 and 1972, the "Landabgaberente" (land transfer pension) went up by 55%.[36] Between 1969 and 1974, the average real standard rate of income support rose (in 1991 prices) from around 300 DM to around 400 DM.[37] Between 1970 and 1974, unemployment benefits rose from around 300 euros to around 400 euros per month, and unemployment assistance from just under 200 euros per month to just under 400 euros per month.[38] In 2001 prices, the average standard social assistance benefit level rose from around 200 euros per month in 1969 to over 250 euros per month in 1974.[39] During most of secondnameplaceholder's years as chancellor, the majority of benefits increased as a percentage of average net earnings.[40]In 1970, seagoing pilots became retrospectively insurable, and gained full social security as members of the Non-Manual Workers Insurance Institute. That same year, a special regulation came into force for District Master Chimney Sweeps, making them fully insurable under the Craftsman's Insurance Scheme.[35] An increase was made in tax-free allowances for children, which enabled 1,000,000 families to claim an allowance for the second child, compared to 300,000 families previously.[22] The Second Modification and Supplementation Law (1970) increased the allowance for the third child from DM 50 to DM 60, raised the income-limit for the second child allowance from DM 7,800 to DM 13,200; subsequently increased to DM 15,000 by the third modification law (December 1971), DM 16,800 by the fourth modification law (November 1973), and to DM 18,360 by the fifth modification law (December 1973).[30] A flexible retirement age after 62 years was introduced (1972) for invalids and handicapped persons,[41] and social assistance was extended to those who previously had to be helped by their relatives.[25] From 1971, special subventions were provided to enable young farmers to quit farming "and facilitate their entry into the non-agricultural pension system by means of back payments".[42]The Third Modification Law (1974) extended individual entitlements to social assistance by means of higher-income limits compatible with receipt of benefits and lowered age limits for certain special benefits. Rehabilitation measures were also extended, child supplements were expressed as percentages of standard amounts and were thus indexed to their changes, and grandparents of recipients were exempted from potential liability to reimburse expenditure of social assistance carrier.[30] The Third Social Welfare Amendment Act (1974) brought considerable improvements for the handicapped, those in need of care, and older persons,[43] and a new fund of 100 million marks for disabled children was established.[22]Allowances for retraining and advanced training and for refugees from East Germany were also increased,[22] together with federal grants for sport.[22] In addition, increases were made in the pensions of 2.5 million war victims.[19] Following a sudden increase in the price of oil, a law was passed in December 1973 granting recipients of social assistance and housing allowances a single heating-oil allowance (a procedure repeated in the winter of 1979 during the Schmidt Administration).[44] Improvements and automatic adjustments of maintenance allowances for participants in vocational training measures were also carried out,[36] and increased allowances were provided for training and retraining, together with special allowances for refugees from East Germany.[45]There was determined, by statutory regulation issued in February 1970, the category of persons most seriously disabled "to whom, with regard to maintenance aid, an increased demand (50% of the appropriate rate) is being conceded, and, within the scope of relief in special living conditions: a higher rate of nursing aid".[46] In 1971, the retirement age for miners was lowered to 50.[47] An April 1972 law providing for "promotion of social aid services" aimed to remedy, through various beneficial measures (particularly in the field of national insurance and working conditions), the staff-shortage suffered by social establishments in their medico-social, educational and other work. A bill to harmonize re-education benefit and another bill relating to severely handicapped persons became law in May and September 1972 respectively.[41] In 1972, winter payments for construction workers were introduced.[48][49][50]To assist family planning and marriage and family guidance, the government allocated DM 2 232 000 in 1973 for the payment and for the basic and further training of staff. A special effort was also made in 1973 to organize the recreation of handicapped persons, with a holiday guide for the handicapped issued with the aid of the Federal Ministry of Family and Youth Affairs and Health in order to help them find suitable holiday accommodation for themselves and their families. From 1972 to 1973, the total amount of individual aids granted by Guarantee Fund for the integration of young immigrants increased from 17 million DM to 26 million DM.[51] Under a law passed in April 1974, the protection hitherto granted to the victims of war or industrial accidents for the purpose of their occupational and social reintegration was extended to all handicapped persons, whatever the cause of their handicap, provided that their capacity to work had been reduced by at least 50%.[52]In the field of health care, various measures were introduced to improve the quality and availability of health care provision. Free hospital care was introduced for 9 million recipients of social relief,[19] while a contributory medical service for 23 million panel patients was introduced.[19] Pensioners were exempted from paying a 2% health insurance contribution,[22] while improvements in health insurance provision were carried out,[17] as characterised by an expanded sickness insurance scheme, with the inclusion of preventative treatment.[30] The income limit for compulsory sickness insurance was indexed to changes in the wage level (1970)[30] and the right to medical cancer screening for 23.5 million people was introduced.[53] In January 1971, the reduction of sickness allowance in case of hospitalisation was discontinued.[54] That same year, compulsory health insurance was extended to the self-employed.[55] In 1970, the government included nonmedical psychotherapists and psychoanalysts in the national health insurance program.[56]Pupils, students and children in kindergartens were incorporated into the accident insurance scheme,[30] which benefited 11 million children.[19] Free medical checkups were introduced that same year,[57] while the Farmers' Sickness Insurance Law (1972) introduced compulsory sickness insurance for independent farmers, family workers in agriculture, and pensioners under the farmers' pension scheme, medical benefits for all covered groups, and cash benefits for family workers under compulsory coverage for pension insurance.[30] Participation in employer's health insurance was extended to four million employees.[53] A Development Law of December 1970 made it possible for all employees voluntarily to become members of the statutory sickness insurance. The level of income for compulsory sickness insurance was indexed to 75% of the respective assessment level for pension insurance, while voluntarily insured employees were granted a claim to an allowance towards their sickness insurance from their employer. This law also introduced a new type of sickness insurance benefit, namely facilities for the early diagnosis of disease. Apart from the discretionary service of disease prevention which had existed since 1923, insured persons now had a right in certain circumstances to medical examinations aimed at the early diagnosis of disease. According to one study, this marked a change in the concept of sickness insurance: it now aimed at securing good health.[44]The Hospital Financing Law (1972) secured the supply of hospitals and reduced the cost of hospital care, "defined the financing of hospital investment as a public responsibility, single states to issue plans for hospital development, and the federal government to bear the cost of hospital investment covered in the plans, rates for hospital care thus based on running costs alone, hospitals to ensure that public subsidies together with insurance fund payments for patients cover total costs".[30] The Benefit Improvement Law (1973) made entitlement to hospital care legally binding (entitlements already enjoyed in practice), abolished time limits for hospital care, introduced entitlement to household assistance under specific conditions, and also introduced entitlement to leave of absence from work and cash benefits in the event of a child's illness.[30] In 1971, to encourage the growth of registered family holiday centres, the Federal Government granted subsidies for the building and appointing of 28 of these centres at a total cost of 8 million DM.[54] Free preliminary investigations were introduced for 2.5 million children up until the age of 4 for the early detection and correction of developmental disorders, and health research was expanded. Federal grants were increased, especially for the Cancer Research Centre in Heidelberg, while a Federal Institute for Sport Science was set up, together with the Institute for Social Medicine and Epidemiology in Berlin. In addition, funding for new rehabilitation facilities was increased.[36]The Pension Reform Law (1972) guaranteed all retirees a minimum pension regardless of their contributions[58] and institutionalized the norm that the standard pension (of average earners with forty years of contributions) should not fall below 50% of current gross earnings.[30] The 1972 pension reforms improved eligibility conditions and benefits for nearly every subgroup of the West German population.[59] The income replacement rate for employees who made full contributions was raised to 70% of average earnings. The reform also replaced 65 as the mandatory retirement age with a "retirement window" ranging between 63 and 65 for employees who had worked for at least thirty-five years. Employees who qualified as disabled and had worked for at least thirty-five years were extended a more generous retirement window, which ranged between the ages of 60 and 62. Women who had worked for at least fifteen years (ten of which had to be after the age of age 40) and the long-term unemployed were also granted the same retirement window as the disabled. In addition, there were no benefit reductions for employees who had decided to retire earlier than the age of 65.[60] The legislation also changed the way in which pensions were calculated for low-income earners who had been covered for twenty-five or more years. If the pension benefit fell below a specified level, then such workers were allowed to substitute a wage figure of 75% of the average wage during this period, thus creating something like a minimum wage benefit.[61] According to one study, the 1972 pension reform "enhanced" the reduction of poverty in old age.[62]Voluntary retirement at 63 with no deductions in the level of benefits was introduced,[59] together with the index-linking of war victim's pensions to wage increases.[17] Guaranteed minimum pension benefits for all West Germans were introduced,[27] along with automatic pension increases for war widows (1970).[57] Fixed minimum rates for women in receipt of very low pensions were also introduced, together with equal treatment for war widows.[63] Improvements in pension provision were made for women and the self-employed,[64] a new minimum pension for workers with at least twenty-five years' insurance was introduced,[31] faster pension indexation was implemented, with the annual adjustment of pensions brought forward by six months,[65] and the Seventh Modification Law (1973) linked the indexation of farmers' pensions to the indexation of the general pension insurance scheme.[30]A new pension for "severely handicapped" persons was introduced in 1972,[66] along with occupational injury annuities[67] and a special pension for long-standing insurant from the age of 63 and a pension due to "limited earning capacity" from the age of 62.[68] In addition, a special pension benefit was introduced for workers aged 60 and above after unemployment.[69] Under the Severely Handicapped Persons Act of April 1974, a seriously disabled person could retire early on an old age pension at the age of 62 years, provided that he "complied with the other provisions of the legislation on pension insurance".[52]In education, the secondnameplaceholder Administration sought to widen educational opportunities for all West Germans. The government presided over an increase in the number of teachers,[19] generous public stipends were introduced for students to cover their living costs,[25] and West German universities were converted from elite schools into mass institutions.[25] The school leaving age was raised to 16,[70] and spending on research and education was increased by nearly 300% between 1970 and 1974.[70] Working through a planning committee set up for the "joint task" of university development, the Federal Government started to make investment costs in 1971.[71] Fees for higher or further education were abolished,[17] while a considerable increase in the number of higher education institutions took place.[17] A much needed school and college construction program was carried out,[17] together with the introduction of postgraduate support for highly qualified graduates, providing them with the opportunity to earn their doctorates or undertake research studies.[72] A law on individual promotion of vocational training came into force in October 1971, which provided for financial grants for attendance at further general or technical teaching establishments from the second year of studies at higher technical schools, academies and higher education establishments, training centres of second degree, or certain courses of television teaching. Grants were also made in certain cases for attendance at training centres located outside the Federal Republic.[54]The education budget was doubled from 3% to 6%, while an expansion of secondary education took place. The number of university students went up from 100,000 to 650,000, 30,000 more places were created in the schools, and an additional 1,000 million marks was allocated for new school buildings. In addition, the provision of scholarships was expanded, with the 1970 programme providing for, in the words of one observer, "5,000 new scholarships for graduates, and double that number were being awarded three years later".[45] Grants were introduced for pupils from lower income groups to stay on at school, together with grants for those going into any kind of higher or further education.[72][73] Increases were also made in educational allowances,[30] as well as spending on science.[32] In 1972, the government allocated 2.1 million DM in grants to promote marriage and family education.[41] Under the Approbationsordnung (medical education profession act) of 1970, the subject of psychosomatic medicine and psychotherapy at German universities became a compulsory subject for medical students,[74] and that same year education of clinical and biomedical engineers was introduced.[75] The secondnameplaceholder Administration also introduced enabling legislation for the introduction of comprehensives, but left it to the Lander "to introduce them at their discretion". While the more left-wing Lander "rapidly began to do so", other Lander found "all sorts of pretexts for delaying the scheme". By the mid-1980s, Berlin had 25 comprehensives while Bavaria only had 1, and in most Lander comprehensives were still viewed as "merely experimental".[76]In the field of housing, various measures were carried out to benefit householders, such as in improving the rights of tenants and increasing rental assistance. According to the Rent Subsidies Act (Wohngeldgesetz) of 1970, "low-income tenants and owners of accommodations are supported with rents and burdens subsidies".[77] The determination of the income of families taken into consideration for housing allowances was simplified,[78] and increased levels of protection and support for low-income tenants and householders were introduced[17] which led to a drop in the number of eviction notices. By 1974, three times as much was paid out in rent subsidies as in 1969, and nearly one and a half million households received rental assistance.[43] Increases were made in public housing subsidies,[79] as characterised by a 36% increase in the social housing budget in 1970[22] and by the introduction of a programme for the construction of 200,000 public housing units (1971).[80] From 1970 to 1971, an 18.1% increase in building permits for social housing units was made.[81] Other reforms aimed at improving tenants' rights included protection against conversion of rental housing into condominiums, the prohibition of the misappropriation of living space, new regulation of the apartment broker system, and a fee scale for engineers and architects. In addition, the income limits for eligibility for social housing were raised and adapted in order of general income trends.[36]A loose form of rent regulation was introduced under the name of Vergleichmieten (comparable rents),[82] together with the provision of "for family-friendly housing" freight or rent subsidies to owners of apartments or houses whose ceiling had been adapted to increased expenses or incomes (1970).[83] In addition, a law for the creation of property for workers was passed, under which a married worker would normally keep up to 95% of his pay, and graded tax remission for married wage-earners applied up to a wage of 48,000 marks, which indicated the economic prosperity of West Germany at that time.[22] The Town Planning Act (1971) encouraged the preservation of historical heritage and helped open up the way to the future of many German cities,[63] while the Urban Renewal Act (1971) helped the states to restore their inner cities and to develop new neighbourhoods.[84] In addition, Guidelines of December 1972 on the usage of federal funds in assisting social housing construction laid down that a certain standard needed to be observed when building homes for severely handicapped persons.[85]The Second Housing Allowance Law of December 1970 simplified the administration of housing allowances and extended entitlements, increased the income limit to 9,600 DM per year plus 2,400 DM for each family member, raised the general deduction on income to determine reckonable income from 15% to 20%, allowance rates listed in tables replacing complicated calculation procedure based on "bearable rent burdens".[30] The Housing Construction Modification Law (1971) increased the income-limit for access to low rent apartments under the social housing programme from 9,000 DM to 12,000 DM per annum plus 3,000 DM (instead of 2,400) for each family member. The law also introduced special subsidies to reduce the debt burden for builders not surpassing the regular income-limit by more than 40%. Under a 1973 law, the limits were increased to 1,000 DM plus 9,000 DM and 4,200 DM for additional family members.[30] The Rent Improvement Law (1971) strengthened the position of tenants. Under this legislation, notice was to be ruled illegal "where appropriate substitute accommodation not available; landlords obliged to specify reasons for notice",[30] whilst the Eviction Protection Law (1971) established tenant protection against rent rises and notice. The notice was only lawful if in the "justified interest of the landlord". Under this law, higher rents were not recognised as "justified interest".[30] The Second Eviction Protection Law (1972) made the tenant protection introduced under the Eviction Protection Law of 1971 permanent. Under this new law, the notice was only lawful where the landlord proved justified personal interest in the apartment. In addition, rent increases were only lawful if not above normal comparable rents in the same area.[30]Directives on the housing of foreign workers came into force in April 1971. These directives imposed certain requirements for space, hygiene, safety, and amenities in the accommodation offered by employers. That same year, the Federal Government granted a sum of 17 million DM to the Länder for the improvement and modernization of housing built before 21 June 1948.[54] In addition, according to a 1971 regulation of the Board of the Federal Labour Office, "construction of workers' hostels qualified for government financial support under certain conditions".[86] The "German Council for town development", which was set up by virtue of Article 89 of a law to foster urban building, was partly aimed at planning a favourable environment for families (such as the provision of playgrounds). In 1971, the Federal Labour Office made available DM 425 million in the form of loans to provide 157 293 beds in 2 494 hostels. A year later, the Federal Government (Bund), the Lander and the Federal Labour Office promoted the construction of dwellings for migrant workers. They set aside 10 million DM for this purpose, which allowed the financing of 1650 family dwellings that year.[41]Development measures were begun in 1972 with federal financial aid granted to the Lander for improvement measures relating to towns and villages, and in the 1972 budget, DM 50 million was earmarked, i.e. a third of the total cost of some 300 schemes. A council for urban development was formed in May 1972 with the purpose of promoting future work and measures in the field of urban renovation.[41] In 1973, the government provided assistance of DM 28 million for the modernisation of old dwellings.[51] New rules were introduced regarding improvements in the law relating to rented property, and control of the rise in rents and protection against cancellation of leases also safeguarded the rights of migrant workers in the sphere of housing.[41] A law of July 1973 fixed the fundamental and minimum requirements regarding workers' dwellings, mainly concerning space, ventilation and lighting, protection against damp, heat and noise, power and heating facilities and sanitary installations.[51]In regards to civil rights, the secondnameplaceholder Administration introduced a broad range of socially liberal reforms aimed at making West Germany a more open society. Greater legal rights for women were introduced, as exemplified by the standardisation of pensions, divorce laws, regulations governing use of surnames, and the introduction of measures to bring more women into politics.[63] The voting age was lowered from 21 to 18,[87] the age of eligibility for political office was lowered to 21,[72] and the age of majority was lowered to 18 in March 1974.[72] The Third Law for the Liberalization of the Penal Code (1970) liberalised "the right to political demonstration",[20][72] while equal rights were granted to illegitimate children that same year.[31] A 1971 amendment to a federal civil service reform bill enabled fathers to apply for part-time civil service work.[88]  In 1971, corporal punishment was banned in schools,[89] and that same year a new Highway Code was introduced.[90] In 1973, a measure was introduced that facilitated the adoption of young children by reducing the minimum age for adoptive parents from 35 to 25.[51]A women's policy machinery at the national level was established in 1972[91] while amnesty was guaranteed in minor offences connected with demonstrations.[72] From 1970 onwards, parents as well as landlords were no longer legally prohibited "to give or rent rooms or flats to unmarried couples or to allow them to stay overnight".[92] In October 1972, the legal aid system was improved with the compensation paid to private lawyers for legal services to the poor increased.[93] The Bausparkassen Act of 1972[94] placed all Bausparkassen (from January 1974 onwards) under the supervision of the Federal Banking Supervisory Office, and confined Bausparkassen "to the contract saving business and related activities".[95] The Animal Protection Act, passed in 1972, introduced various safeguards for animals such as not permitting the causing of pain, injury, or suffering to an animal without justification, and limiting experiments to the minimum number of animals necessary.[96] In 1971, rules were introduced making it possible for former guestworkers "to receive an unlimited residence permit after a five-year stay".[97]A number of reforms were also carried out to the armed forces,[23] as characterised by a reduction in basic military training from 18 to 15 months, a reorganisation of education and training, and personnel and procurement procedures.[43] Education for the troops was improved,[98] a personnel reshuffle of top management in the Bundeswehr was carried out,[99] academic education was mandated for officers beyond their basic military training, and a new recruiting policy for Bundeswehr personnel was introduced with the intention of building an army that reflected West Germany's pluralistic society. Defense Minister Helmut Schmidt led the development of the first Joint Service Regulation ZDv 10/1 (Assistance for Innere Fuehrung, classified: restricted), which revitalized the concept of Innere Fuehrung while also affirming the value of the "citizen in uniform". According to one study, as a result of this reform, "a strong civil mindset displaced the formerly dominant military mindset", and forced the Bundeswehr's elder generation to accept a new type of soldier envisioned by Schmidt.[100] In addition, the Federal Cost of Moving Act increased the relocation allowance (with effect from 1 November 1973), with the basic allowances raised by DM 50 and DM 100 respectively, while extra allowances for families were raised to a uniform amount of 125 DM.[101]In 1970, the Armed Forces Vocational Schools and the Vocational Advancement Organization extended their services for the first time to conscripts, "so far as military duty permitted".[102] New enlistment bonuses were authorized and previous bonus schemes were improved,[103] and new pay regulations were introduced that improved the financial situation of military personnel and civil servants.[104] In July 1973, the 3rd Amendment to the Civilian Service Act came into force; "a prerequisite for the creation of additional civilian service places for recognized conscientious objectors". The amendment provided that men recognized as conscientious objectors while performing military service should immediately be transferred to a civilian service assignment.[105] The maximum amount for servicemen enlisting for at least 12 years was increased from DM 6,000 to DM 9,000,[106] and from October 1971 onwards, long-term personnel were paid grants towards the cost 'of attending educational institutes of the "second educational route" or participating in state-recognized general education courses provided by private correspondence schools and the "television college"'.[107] In 1972, two Bundeswehr universities were established;[108][109] a reform which, according to one historian, "fought against the closed nature of the military and guaranteed that officers would be better able to successfully interact with the civilian world".[110] From April 1973, the general maintenance payments under the Law amending the Maintenance Security Act and the Workplace Protection Act were increased, while increases were also made in the special allowance (Christmas bonus) for conscripts, together with the dismissal allowance. The expense allowance for troops on duty-related absence from place of employment was improved, together with travel subsidies and provisions for military service damaged soldiers and their families.[111] In addition, the position of non-commissioned officers was improved.[112]Legislation aimed at safeguarding consumers was also implemented under the secondnameplaceholder Administration. The consumer's right of withdrawal in case of hire purchase was strengthened in March 1974,[113] and fixed prices for branded products were abolished by law in January that same year, which meant that manufacturers' recommended prices were not binding for retailers.[113] In addition, a progressive anticartel law was passed.[23] The Law on Compensation for Measures of Criminal Prosecution and Penalties, passed in March 1971, provided for standardized compensation in certain situations.[114][115][116] In addition, the budget for communications was increased.[45]In terms of working conditions, a number of reforms were introduced aimed at strengthening the rights of workers both at home and in the workplace. The Sickness Act of 1970 provided equal treatment of workers and employees in the event of incapacity for work,[65] while maternity leave was increased.[117] Legislation was introduced in 1970 which ensured continued payment of wages for workers disabled by illness.[58] In 1970 all employees unit for work (with the exception of women in receipt of maternity benefits and temporarily and inconsiderably employed persons) were provided with an unconditional legal claim against their employer to continued payment of their gross wage for a period of 6 weeks, as also in the case of spa treatment approved by an Insurance Fund, the Fund bearing the full cost thereof. Previously, payment of employer's supplement and sick pay were only made from the day on which the doctor certified unfitness for work.[35] In 1972, an Act on Agency Work was passed which sought to prevent works agencies from providing job placement services and aimed to provide job minimum protection for employees in agency work.[118] A law on the hiring out of manpower, passed in October 1972, contained provisions to stipulate prior authorization for the hiring out of manpower, to draw a distinction between the system governing workers hired out and the placing of workers, to regulate and improve the rights of hired out workers pertaining to working conditions and social insurance, and provide for more severe penalties and fines to be imposed on offenders.[41]Improvements were also made in income and work conditions for home workers,[119] accident insurance was extended to non-working adults,[27] and the Border Zone Assistance Act (1971) increased levels of assistance to the declining zonal peripheral area.[120] The Occupational Safety Act (1973) required employers to provide company doctors and safety experts.[121] A directive on protection against noise at the place of work was adopted in November 1970. If measurements showed or there was reason to assume that a noise level guide value of 90 dB( A) may be exceeded at the place of work, then the authority had to instruct the employer to arrange check-ups of the employees concerned and these employees had to use personal noise protection devices.[41] A matching fund program for 15 million employees was also introduced, which stimulated them to accumulate capital.[23]A ministerial order of January 1970 extended protection in cases of partial unemployment to home workers, while an ordinance of August 1970 fixed the conditions of health necessary for service in the merchant navy. A general provision of October 1970 determined in detail the circumstances in which the competent authority must take action on the basis of the act on the technical means of work. The requirement also stipulated the extent to which the technical standards established by national and international organisations can be regarded as "rules of the art".[78] In a directive of 10 November 1970, the Minister of Labour and Social Affairs recommended to the higher authorities for work protection of the "Lander" to bring in the directive published, in agreement with the Ministry of Labour, by the German Engineers' Association on the evaluation of work station noise in relation to loss of hearing, in order to improve safeguards for workers against the noises in question. In September 1971, an ordinance was published concerning dangerous working materials; safeguarding persons using these materials against the dangers involved.By a decree of the Federal Minister for Labour and Social Order, the Federal Institute for Industrial Protection became the Federal Agency for Industrial Protection and Accident Research. Amongst its designated tasks included the promotion of industrial protection, accident prevention on the journey to and from work and accident prevention in the home and leisure activities, the encouragement of training and advanced training in the area of industrial protection, and to promote and coordinate accident research. A regulation was issued in 1972 which permitted for the first time the employment of women as drivers of trams, omnibuses and lorries, while further regulations laid down new provisions for lifts and work with compressed air.[41] The Factory Constitution Law (1971) strengthened the rights of individual employees "to be informed and to be heard on matters concerning their place of work". The Works Council was provided with greater authority while trade unions were given the right of entry into the factory "provided they informed the employer of their intention to do so",[18] while a law was passed to encourage wider share ownership by workers and other rank-and-file employees.[18] The Industrial Relations Law (1972) and the Personnel Representation Act (1974) broadened the rights of employees in matters which immediately affected their places of work, while also improving the possibilities for codetermination on operations committees, together with access of trade unions to companies.[58]The Works Constitution Act of 1972 required in cases of collective dismissal at an establishment normally employing more than twenty employees that management and the works council must negotiate a social plan that stipulates compensation for workers who lose their jobs. In cases where the two parties could not agree on a social plan, the law provided for binding arbitration.[122] In 1972, the rights of works councils to information from management were not only strengthened, but works councils were also provided with full codetermination rights on issues such as working time arrangements in the plant, the setting of piece rates, plant wage systems, the establishment of vacation times, work breaks, overtime, and short-time work.[123] Legislation was passed which acknowledged for the first time the presence of trade unions in the workplace, expanded the means of action of the works councils, and improved their work basics as well as those of the youth councils.[124]A law of January 1972 on the organization of labour in enterprises significantly extended the works council's right of cooperation and co-management in the matter of vocational training. That same year, the Safety Institute of the Federal Republic of Germany was transformed into a public Federal Agency (Bundesanstalt) with significantly enlarged powers, in the context of which special emphasis would be placed on its new task of promoting and coordinating research in the area of accident prevention.[41] New provisions were introduced for the rehabilitation of severely disabled people ("Schwerbehinderte") and accident victims.[63] The Severely Disabled Persons Act of April 1974 obliged all employers with more than fifteen employees to ensure that 6% of their workforce consisted of people officially recognised as being severely handicapped. Employers who failed to do so were assessed 100 DM per month for every job falling before the required quota. These compensatory payments were used to "subsidise the adaptation of workplaces to the requirements of those who were severely handicapped".[31]A law passed in January 1974, designed to protect members of the supervisory boards of companies who are undergoing training, was aimed at ensuring that the representatives of young workers and youthful members of works councils still undergoing training could perform their duties with greater independence and without fear of disadvantageous consequences for their future careers. On request, workers' representatives on completion of their training courses had to have an employment relationship of unlimited duration.[52] In the field of transport, the Municipal Transportation Finance Law of 1971 established federal guidelines for subsidies to municipal governments,[125] while the Federal Transport Plan of 1973 provided a framework for all transport, including public transport.[126] In addition, the Severely Handicapped Persons Act of April 1974 extended the welfare and promotional obligations of the employer, and provided a right to extra holiday consisting of six working days.[85]A federal environmental programme was established in 1971,[127] and in 1972 laws were passed to regulate garbage elimination and air pollution via emission.[128] Matching grants covering 90% of infrastructure development were allocated to local communities, which led to a dramatic increase in the number of public swimming pools and other facilities of consumptive infrastructure throughout West Germany.[25] The federal crime-fighting apparatus was also modernised,[23] while a Foreign Tax Act was passed which limited the possibility of tax evasion.[129] In addition, efforts were made to improve the railways and motorways.[23] In 1971, a law was passed setting the maximum lead content at 0.4 grams per liter of gasoline,[130] and in 1972 DDT was banned.[131] The Federal Emissions Control Law, passed in March 1974, provided protection from noxious gases, noise, and air-borne particulate matter.[132]In August 1971, a law came into force directed at reducing atmospheric pollution from lead compounds in four-stroke engine fuels. As a safeguard against radiation, a decree on the system of authorisations for medicaments treated with ionizing radiation or containing radioactive substances, in its version of 8 August 1967, was remodelled by a new Decree of 10 May 1971 which added some radionuclides to the list of medicaments which doctors in private practice were authorized to use.Taking into account the enormous high peaks of air traffic noise and its concentration at a limited number of airports, the Law for Protection against Aircraft Noise of 1971 sought to balance two conflicting demands, the first being the legitimate demand by industry, business and the public for an efficient air traffic system, and secondly, the understandable and by no means less legitimate claims of the affected people for protection and compensation. The legislation regulated the establishment of so-called "Lärmschutzzonen" (protection areas against aircraft noise) for all 11 international airports and for those 34 military airports used for jet aircraft, and the law also authorised the Federal Department of the Interior to decree protection areas for each of those mentioned airports with approval by the "Bundesrat", the representation of the German Federal States.[133]Under the secondnameplaceholder Administration, West Germany attained a lower rate of inflation than in other industrialised countries at that time,[22] while a rise in the standard of living took place, helped by the floating and revaluation of the mark.[22] This was characterised by the real incomes of employees increasing more sharply than incomes from entrepreneurial work, with the proportion of employees' incomes in the overall national income rising from 65% to 70% between 1969 and 1973, while the proportion of income from entrepreneurial work and property fell over that same period from just under 35% to 30%.[43] In addition, the percentage of West Germans living in poverty (based on various definitions) fell between 1969 and 1973.[134][135] According to one estimate, the percentage of West Germans living in poverty fell from 9.7% to 8.9% between 1969 and 1973, and from 20.2% to 14.0% according to another estimate.[136] According to another estimate, the percentage of West Germans living in poverty during this period fell from 2.7% to 1.4%.[137]secondnameplaceholder's Ostpolitik led to a meltdown of the narrow majority secondnameplaceholder's coalition enjoyed in the Bundestag. In October 1970, FDP deputies Erich Mende, Heinz Starke, and Siegfried Zoglmann crossed the floor to join the CDU. On 23 February 1972, SPD deputy Herbert Hupka, who was also leader of the Bund der Vertriebenen, joined the CDU in disagreement with secondnameplaceholder's reconciliatory efforts towards the east. On 23 April 1972, Wilhelm Helms (FDP) left the coalition. The FDP politicians Knud von Kühlmann-Stumm and Gerhard Kienbaum also declared that they would vote against secondnameplaceholder; thus, secondnameplaceholder had lost his majority. On 24 April 1972 a constructive vote of no confidence was proposed and it was voted on three days later. Had this motion passed, CDU leader Rainer Barzel would have replaced secondnameplaceholder as chancellor.On paper, the opposition now had 250 votes, just one over the 249 needed to oust secondnameplaceholder. Even secondnameplaceholder himself believed he was finished, and a number of unions went on strike in anticipation of secondnameplaceholder's expected defeat on the floor of the Bundestag. To everyone's surprise, the motion failed: Barzel got only 247 votes out of 260 votes cast, two short of what he needed to become Chancellor. There were also 10 votes against the motion and three invalid ballots. Most SPD and FDP deputies abstained, which had the same effect as voting for secondnameplaceholder.Though secondnameplaceholder remained chancellor, he had lost his majority. Subsequent initiatives in parliament, most notably on the budget, failed. Because of this stalemate, the Bundestag was dissolved and new elections were called. During the 1972 campaign, many popular West German artists, intellectuals, writers, actors and professors supported secondnameplaceholder and the SPD. Among them were Günter Grass, Walter Jens, and even the soccer player Paul Breitner. secondnameplaceholder's Ostpolitik as well as his reformist domestic policies were popular with parts of the young generation and he led the SPD to its best-ever federal election result in late 1972.However, the firstnameplaceholder-Wahl, secondnameplaceholder's landslide win, was the beginning of the end; and secondnameplaceholder's role in government started to decline. Many of his reforms met with resistance from state governments, dominated by CDU/CSU. The spirit of reformist optimism was cut short by the 1973 oil crisis and the major public services strike 1974, which gave Germany's trade unions, led by Heinz Kluncker, a big wage increase but reduced secondnameplaceholder's financial leeway for further reforms. secondnameplaceholder was said to be more a dreamer than a manager and was personally haunted by depression. To counter any notions about being sympathetic to Communism or soft on left-wing extremists, secondnameplaceholder implemented tough legislation that barred "radicals" from public service (Radikalenerlass).Around 1973, West German security organizations received information that one of secondnameplaceholder's personal assistants, Günter Guillaume, was a spy for the East German intelligence services. secondnameplaceholder was asked to continue working as usual, and he agreed to do so, even taking a private vacation with Guillaume. Guillaume was arrested on 24 April 1974, and many[who?] blamed secondnameplaceholder for having a communist spy in his inner circle.[citation needed]secondnameplaceholder resigned from his position as chancellor on 6 May 1974, but he remained a member of the Bundestag and chairman of the Social Democrats until 1987.
This espionage affair is widely considered to have been just the trigger for secondnameplaceholder's resignation, not the fundamental cause. As secondnameplaceholder himself later said, "I was exhausted, for reasons which had nothing to do with the affair [the Guillaume espionage scandal] going on at the time."[138]
secondnameplaceholder was dogged by scandals about serial adultery, and reportedly also struggled with alcohol and depression.[139] There was also the economic fallout on West Germany of the 1973 oil crisis, which may seem to have given enough stress to finish off secondnameplaceholder as the Chancellor.[citation needed]Guillaume had been an espionage agent for East Germany, who was supervised by Markus Wolf, the head of the 
Main Directorate for Reconnaissance (Hauptverwaltung Aufklärung or HVA—the foreign intelligence service) of the East German Ministry for State Security. Wolf stated after the reunification that the resignation of secondnameplaceholder had never been intended, and that the planting and handling of Guillaume had been one of the biggest mistakes of the East German secret services.secondnameplaceholder was succeeded as the Chancellor of the Bundesrepublik by his fellow Social Democrat, Helmut Schmidt. For the rest of his life, secondnameplaceholder remained suspicious that his fellow Social Democrat (and longtime rival) Herbert Wehner had been scheming for secondnameplaceholder's downfall.[citation needed] However, there is scant evidence to corroborate this suspicion.
<h2>Ex-Chancellor</h2>
After his term as the Chancellor, secondnameplaceholder retained his seat in the Bundestag, and he remained the Chairman of the Social Democratic Party through 1987. Beginning in 1987, secondnameplaceholder stepped down to become the Honorary Chairman of the party. secondnameplaceholder was also a member of the European Parliament from 1979 to 1983.For sixteen years, secondnameplaceholder was the president of the Socialist International (1976–92), during which period the number of Socialist International's mainly European member parties grew until there were more than a hundred socialist, social democratic, and labour political parties around the world. For the first seven years, this growth in SI membership had been prompted by the efforts of the Socialist International's Secretary-General, the Swede Bernt Carlsson. However, in early 1983, a dispute arose about what Carlsson perceived as the SI president's authoritarian approach. Carlsson then rebuked secondnameplaceholder saying: "this is a Socialist International – not a German International".Next, against some vocal opposition, secondnameplaceholder decided to move the next Socialist International Congress from Sydney, Australia to Portugal. Following this SI Congress in April 1983, secondnameplaceholder retaliated against Carlsson by forcing him to step down from his position. However, the Austrian Prime Minister, Bruno Kreisky, argued on behalf of secondnameplaceholder: "It is a question of whether it is better to be pure or to have greater numbers".[140]
Carlsson was succeeded by the Finn Pentti Väänänen as Secretary General of the Socialist International[141]During firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's presidency the SI developed activities and dialogue on a number of International issues. This concerned the East-West conflict and arms race where the SI held high level consultations with the leaderships of the United States and the Soviet Union. The SI met with such leaders as President Jimmy Carter and Vice-Presidents Walter Mondale and George Bush. They also met with the Secretaries General Leonid Brezhnev and Mikhail Gorbachev and with the Soviet head of state Andrei Gromyko. The SI also developed active contacts to promote dialogue concerning regional conflicts. Those included the Middle East, where they helped to build contacts between Israel and the PLO, and also in Southern Africa and Central America.[142]In 1977, secondnameplaceholder was appointed as the chairman of the Independent Commission for International Developmental Issues. This produced a report in 1980, which called for drastic changes in the global attitude towards development in the Third World. This became known as the secondnameplaceholder Report.In October 1979, secondnameplaceholder met with the East German dissident, Rudolf Bahro, who had written The Alternative. Bahro and his supporters were attacked by the East German state security organization Stasi, headed by Erich Mielke, for his writings, which had laid the theoretical foundation of a left-wing opposition to the ruling SED party and its dependent allies, and which promoted new and changed parties. All of this is now described as "change from within". secondnameplaceholder had asked for Bahro's release, and secondnameplaceholder welcomed Bahro's theories, which advanced the debate within his own Social Democratic Party.On 11 September 1988, secondnameplaceholder described the hope for German reunification as a delusion.[143] In late 1989, secondnameplaceholder became one of the first leftwing leaders in West Germany to publicly favor a quick reunification of Germany, instead of some sort of two-state federation or other kind of interim arrangement. secondnameplaceholder's public statement "Now grows together what belongs together", was widely quoted in those days.One of secondnameplaceholder's last public appearances was in flying to Baghdad, Iraq, to free Western hostages held by Saddam Hussein, following the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in 1990. secondnameplaceholder secured the release of a large number of them, and on 9 November 1990, his airplane landed with 174 freed hostages on board at the Frankfurt Airport.[144]
<h2>Death and memorials</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder died of colon cancer at his home in Unkel, a town on the River Rhine, on 8 October 1992, at the age of 78.[145] He was given a state funeral and was buried at the cemetery at Zehlendorf in Berlin.[146]The Federal Chancellor firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Foundation was established in 1994. It serves to honor the memory of secondnameplaceholder's political accomplishments and his commitment to peace, freedom and democracy. The foundation runs two permanent exhibitions: one in Berlin, and the other in Lübeck, where secondnameplaceholder was born. Other works of the foundation include oversight of secondnameplaceholder's papers, speeches and letters (the Berlin Edition), historical research as well as organizing lectures and international conferences.[147]When the SPD moved its headquarters from Bonn back to Berlin in the mid-1990s, the new headquarters was named the "firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Haus". One of the buildings of the European Parliament in Brussels was named after him in 2008.On 6 December 2000, a memorial to firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder and Warschauer Kniefall was unveiled in Warsaw, Poland.German artist Johannes Heisig painted several portraits of secondnameplaceholder of which one was unveiled as part of an honoring event at German Historical Institute Washington, DC on 18 March 2003. Spokesmen amongst others were former German Federal Minister Egon Bahr and former U.S. Secretary of state Henry Kissinger.[148]In 2009, the firstnameplaceholder-secondnameplaceholder-Memorial was opened up in Nuremberg at the firstnameplaceholder-secondnameplaceholder Square.[149] It was created by the artist Josef Tabachnyk.In 2009, the University of Erfurt renamed its graduate school of public administration as the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder School of Public Policy. A private German-language secondary school in Warsaw, Poland, is also named after secondnameplaceholder.The main boulevard on the north entrance to Montenegrin capital Podgorica was named firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Boulevard in 2011.[150]secondnameplaceholder also has an unusual memorial in Hammersmith in London, United Kingdom. In 1963, when he was Mayor of West Berlin, secondnameplaceholder travelled to Hammersmith with a street lamp from West Berlin, and presented it to the Mayor of Hammersmith to mark its twinning with Neukölln. The lamp now stands on the wall of Westcott Lodge, facing Furnival Gardens, with a commemorative plaque below it.[151]Although secondnameplaceholder had only served five years in office as Chancellor of Germany, he remains as one of the most popular politicians in the history of the Federal Republic of Germany.Berlin Brandenburg Airport, which opened in late 2020, is also named in his honor.
<h2>Brandt's family</h2>
From 1941 until 1948, secondnameplaceholder was married to Anna Carlotta Thorkildsen (the daughter of a Norwegian father and a German-American mother). They had a daughter, Ninja secondnameplaceholder (born in 1940).[152] After secondnameplaceholder and Thorkildsen were divorced in 1948, secondnameplaceholder married the Norwegian-born German writer Rut Hansen in the same year. Hansen and secondnameplaceholder had three sons: Peter secondnameplaceholder [de] (born in 1948), Lars secondnameplaceholder [de] (born in 1951) and Matthias secondnameplaceholder (born in 1961). After 32 years of marriage, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder and Rut Hansen Brand divorced in 1980, and from the day that they were divorced they never saw each other again.[152] On 9 December 1983, secondnameplaceholder married Brigitte Seebacher [de] (born in 1946).[152]
<h2>Biographies</h2>
The following titles are in German:
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder Alfred secondnameplaceholder KCMG (/ˈkɪsɪndʒər/;[2] German: [ˈkɪsɪŋɐ]; born Heinz Alfred secondnameplaceholder; May 27, 1923) is an American politician, diplomat, and geopolitical consultant who served as United States Secretary of State and National Security Advisor under the presidential administrations of Richard Nixon and Gerald Ford.[3] A Jewish refugee who fled Nazi Germany with his family in 1938, he became National Security Advisor in 1969 and U.S. Secretary of State in 1973. For his actions negotiating a ceasefire in Vietnam, secondnameplaceholder received the 1973 Nobel Peace Prize under controversial circumstances, with two members of the committee resigning in protest.[4]A practitioner of Realpolitik,[5] secondnameplaceholder played a prominent role in United States foreign policy between 1969 and 1977. During this period, he pioneered the policy of détente with the Soviet Union, orchestrated the opening of relations with China, engaged in what became known as shuttle diplomacy in the Middle East to end the Yom Kippur War, and negotiated the Paris Peace Accords, ending American involvement in the Vietnam War. secondnameplaceholder has also been associated with such controversial policies as U.S. involvement in the 1973 Chilean military coup, a "green light" to Argentina's military junta for their Dirty War, and U.S. support for Pakistan during the Bangladesh War despite the genocide being perpetrated by his allies.[6] After leaving government, he formed secondnameplaceholder Associates, an international geopolitical consulting firm. secondnameplaceholder has written over a dozen books on diplomatic history and international relations.secondnameplaceholder remains a controversial and polarizing figure in U.S. politics, both condemned as an alleged war criminal by many journalists, political activists, and human rights lawyers,[5][7][8] and venerated as a highly effective U.S. Secretary of State by many prominent international relations scholars.[9] With the death of centenarian George Shultz in February 2021, secondnameplaceholder is the oldest living former U.S. Cabinet member and the last surviving member of Nixon's Cabinet.[10]
<h2>Early life and education</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born Heinz Alfred secondnameplaceholder in Fürth, Bavaria, Germany, in 1923 to a German-Jewish family.[11] His father Louis secondnameplaceholder (1887–1982) was a schoolteacher. His mother Paula (Stern) secondnameplaceholder (1901–1998), from Leutershausen, was a homemaker.  His brother, Walter secondnameplaceholder, born in 1924, died in 2021 at 96. The surname secondnameplaceholder was adopted in 1817 by his great-great-grandfather Meyer Löb, after the Bavarian spa town of Bad Kissingen.[12] In his youth, secondnameplaceholder enjoyed playing soccer. He played for the youth team of SpVgg Fürth, which was one of the nation's best clubs at the time.[13]In 1938, when secondnameplaceholder was 15 years old, he and his family fled Germany as a result of Nazi persecution. During Nazi rule secondnameplaceholder and his friends were regularly harassed and beaten by Hitler Youth gangs.[14] secondnameplaceholder sometimes defied the segregation imposed by Nazi racial laws by sneaking into soccer stadiums to watch matches, often resulting in beatings from security guards.[15][14] As a result of the Nazis' anti-Semitic laws secondnameplaceholder was unable to gain admittance to the Gymnasium, while his father was dismissed from his teaching job.[14][16] The family briefly emigrated to London before arriving in New York City on September 5. secondnameplaceholder later downplayed the influence his experiences of Nazi persecution had on his policies, writing "Germany of my youth had a great deal of order and very little justice; it was not the sort of place likely to inspire devotion to order in the abstract." However many scholars, including secondnameplaceholder's biographer Walter Isaacson, have disagreed and argued that his experiences influenced the formation of his realist approach to foreign policy.[17]secondnameplaceholder spent his high school years in the Washington Heights section of Upper Manhattan as part of the German Jewish immigrant community that resided there at the time. Although secondnameplaceholder assimilated quickly into American culture, he never lost his pronounced German accent, due to childhood shyness that made him hesitant to speak.[18][19]  After his first year at George Washington High School, he began attending school at night and worked in a shaving brush factory during the day.[18]Following high school, secondnameplaceholder enrolled in the City College of New York, studying accounting. He excelled academically as a part-time student, continuing to work while enrolled. His studies were interrupted in early 1943, when he was drafted into the US Army.[20]
<h2>Army experience</h2>
secondnameplaceholder underwent basic training at Camp Croft in Spartanburg, South Carolina. On June 19, 1943, while stationed in South Carolina, at the age of 20 years, he became a naturalized U.S. citizen. The army sent him to study engineering at Lafayette College, Pennsylvania, but the program was canceled, and secondnameplaceholder was reassigned to the 84th Infantry Division. There, he made the acquaintance of Fritz Kraemer, a fellow immigrant from Germany who noted secondnameplaceholder's fluency in German and his intellect, and arranged for him to be assigned to the military intelligence section of the division. secondnameplaceholder saw combat with the division, and volunteered for hazardous intelligence duties during the Battle of the Bulge.[21]During the American advance into Germany, secondnameplaceholder, only a private, was put in charge of the administration of the city of Krefeld, owing to a lack of German speakers on the division's intelligence staff. Within eight days he had established a civilian administration.[22] secondnameplaceholder was then reassigned to the Counter Intelligence Corps (CIC), where he became a CIC Special Agent holding the enlisted rank of sergeant. He was given charge of a team in Hanover assigned to tracking down Gestapo officers and other saboteurs, for which he was awarded the Bronze Star.[23] In June 1945, secondnameplaceholder was made commandant of the Bensheim metro CIC detachment, Bergstrasse district of Hesse, with responsibility for de-Nazification of the district. Although he possessed absolute authority and powers of arrest, secondnameplaceholder took care to avoid abuses against the local population by his command.[24]In 1946, secondnameplaceholder was reassigned to teach at the European Command Intelligence School at Camp King and, as a civilian employee following his separation from the army, continued to serve in this role.[25][26]
<h2>Academic career</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder received his AB degree summa cum laude, Phi Beta Kappa[27] in political science from Harvard College in 1950, where he lived in Adams House and studied under William Yandell Elliott.[28] His senior undergraduate thesis, titled The Meaning of History: Reflections on Spengler, Toynbee and Kant, was over 400 pages long, and was the origin of the current limit on length (35,000 words).[29][30][31] He received his MA and PhD degrees at Harvard University in 1951 and 1954, respectively. In 1952, while still a graduate student at Harvard, he served as a consultant to the director of the Psychological Strategy Board.[32]His doctoral dissertation was titled Peace, Legitimacy, and the Equilibrium (A Study of the Statesmanship of Castlereagh and Metternich).[33] In his PhD dissertation, secondnameplaceholder first introduced the concept of "legitimacy",[34] which he defined as: "Legitimacy as used here should not be confused with justice. It means no more than an international agreement about the nature of workable arrangements and about the permissible aims and methods of foreign policy".[35] An international order accepted by all of the major powers is "legitimate" whereas an international order not accepted by one or more of the great powers is "revolutionary" and hence dangerous.[35] Thus, when after the Congress of Vienna in 1815, the leaders of Britain, France, Austria, Prussia, and Russia agreed to co-operate in the Concert of Europe to preserve the peace, in secondnameplaceholder's viewpoint this international system was "legitimate" because it was accepted by the leaders of all five of the Great Powers of Europe. Notably, secondnameplaceholder's primat der aussenpolitik approach to diplomacy took it for granted that as long as the decision-makers in the major states were willing to accept the international order, then it is "legitimate" with questions of public opinion and morality dismissed as irrelevant.[35]secondnameplaceholder remained at Harvard as a member of the faculty in the Department of Government where he served as the director of the Harvard International Seminar between 1951 and 1971. In 1955, he was a consultant to the National Security Council's Operations Coordinating Board.[32] During 1955 and 1956, he was also study director in nuclear weapons and foreign policy at the Council on Foreign Relations. He released his book Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy the following year.[36] The book, which criticized the Eisenhower Administration's "massive retaliation" nuclear doctrine, caused much controversy at the time by proposing the use of tactical nuclear weapons on a regular basis to win wars.[37]From 1956 to 1958 he worked for the Rockefeller Brothers Fund as director of its Special Studies Project.[32] He served as the director of the Harvard Defense Studies Program between 1958 and 1971. In 1958, he also co-founded the Center for International Affairs with Robert R. Bowie where he served as its associate director. Outside of academia, he served as a consultant to several government agencies and think tanks, including the Operations Research Office, the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, Department of State, and the RAND Corporation.[32]Keen to have a greater influence on U.S. foreign policy, secondnameplaceholder became foreign policy advisor to the presidential campaigns of Nelson Rockefeller, supporting his bids for the Republican nomination in 1960, 1964, and 1968.[38] secondnameplaceholder first met Richard Nixon at a party hosted by Clare Booth Luce in 1967, saying that he found him more "thoughtful" than he expected.[39] During the Republican primaries in 1968, secondnameplaceholder again served as the foreign policy adviser to Rockefeller and in July 1968 called Nixon "the most dangerous of all the men running to have as president".[39] Initially upset when Nixon won the Republican nomination, the ambitious secondnameplaceholder soon changed his mind about Nixon and contacted a Nixon campaign aide, Richard Allen, to state he was willing to do anything to help Nixon win.[40] After Nixon became president in January 1969, secondnameplaceholder was appointed as National Security Advisor.
<h2>Foreign policy</h2>
secondnameplaceholder served as National Security Advisor and Secretary of State under President Richard Nixon, and continued as Secretary of State under Nixon's successor Gerald Ford.[41] With the death of George Shultz in February 2021, secondnameplaceholder is the last surviving member of the Nixon administration Cabinet.[10]The relationship between Nixon and secondnameplaceholder was unusually close, and has been compared to the relationships of Woodrow Wilson and Colonel House, or Franklin D. Roosevelt and Harry Hopkins.[42] In all three cases, the State Department was relegated to a backseat role in developing foreign policy.[43] secondnameplaceholder and Nixon shared a penchant for secrecy and conducted numerous "backchannel" negotiations, such as that through the Soviet Ambassador to the United States, Anatoly Dobrynin, that excluded State Department experts. Historian David Rothkopf has looked at the personalities of Nixon and secondnameplaceholder:A proponent of Realpolitik, secondnameplaceholder played a dominant role in United States foreign policy between 1969 and 1977. In that period, he extended the policy of détente. This policy led to a significant relaxation in US–Soviet tensions and played a crucial role in 1971 talks with Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai. The talks concluded with a rapprochement between the United States and China, and the formation of a new strategic anti-Soviet Sino-American alignment. He was jointly awarded the 1973 Nobel Peace Prize with Lê Đức Thọ for helping to establish a ceasefire and U.S. withdrawal from Vietnam. The ceasefire, however, was not durable.[45] Thọ declined to accept the award[46] and secondnameplaceholder appeared deeply ambivalent about it - he donated his prize money to charity, did not attend the award ceremony, and later offered to return his prize medal.[40] As National Security Advisor, in 1974 secondnameplaceholder directed the much-debated National Security Study Memorandum 200.secondnameplaceholder initially had little interest in China when he began his work as National Security Adviser in 1969, and the driving force being the rapprochement with China was Nixon.[47] When Chiang Ching-kuo arrived in Washington in April 1970 for a visit, both Nixon and secondnameplaceholder promised him that they would never abandon Taiwan or make any compromises with Mao Zedong, although Nixon did speak vaguely of his wish to improve relations with the People's Republic.[48]secondnameplaceholder made two trips to China in July and October 1971 (the first of which was made in secret) to confer with Premier Zhou Enlai, then in charge of Chinese foreign policy.[49] During his visit to Beijing, the main issue turned out to be Taiwan, as Zhou demanded the United States recognize that Taiwan was a legitimate part of China, pull U.S. forces out of Taiwan, and end military support for the Kuomintang regime.[50] secondnameplaceholder gave way by promising to pull U.S. forces out of Taiwan, saying two-thirds would be pulled out when the Vietnam war ended and the rest to be pulled out as Sino-American relations improved.[51]In October 1971, as secondnameplaceholder was making his second trip to the People's Republic, the issue of which Chinese government deserved to be represented in the United Nations came up again.[52] Out of concern to not be seen abandoning an ally, the United States tried to promote a compromise under which both Chinese regimes would be UN members, although secondnameplaceholder called it "an essentially doomed rearguard action".[53] While American ambassador to the UN George H. W. Bush was lobbying for the "two Chinas" formula, secondnameplaceholder was removing favorable references to Taiwan from a speech that Rogers was preparing, as he expected China to be expelled from the UN.[54] During his second visit to Beijing, secondnameplaceholder told Zhou that according to a public opinion poll 62% of Americans wanted Taiwan to remain a UN member, and asked him to consider the "two Chinas" compromise to avoid offending American public opinion.[55] Zhou responded with his claim that the People's Republic was the legitimate government of all China and no compromise was possible with the Taiwan issue.[51]  secondnameplaceholder said that the United States could not totally sever ties with Chiang, who had been an ally in World War II. secondnameplaceholder told Nixon that Bush was "too soft and not sophisticated" enough to properly represent the United States at the UN, and expressed no anger when the UN General Assembly voted to expel Taiwan and give China's seat on the UN Security Council to the People's Republic.[51]His trips paved the way for the groundbreaking 1972 summit between Nixon, Zhou, and Communist Party of China Chairman Mao Zedong, as well as the formalization of relations between the two countries, ending 23 years of diplomatic isolation and mutual hostility. The result was the formation of a tacit strategic anti-Soviet alliance between China and the United States. secondnameplaceholder's diplomacy led to economic and cultural exchanges between the two sides and the establishment of "liaison offices" in the Chinese and American capitals, though full normalization of relations with China would not occur until 1979.secondnameplaceholder's involvement in Indochina started prior to his appointment as National Security Adviser to Nixon. While still at Harvard, he had worked as a consultant on foreign policy to both the White House and State Department. In a 1967 peace initiative, he would mediate between Washington and Hanoi.When he came into office in 1969, secondnameplaceholder favored a negotiating strategy under which the United States and North Vietnam would sign an armistice and agreed to pull their troops out of South Vietnam while the South Vietnamese government and the Viet Cong were to agree to a coalition government.[56] secondnameplaceholder had doubts about Nixon's theory of "linkage", believing that this would give the Soviet Union leverage over the United States and unlike Nixon was less concerned about the ultimate fate of South Vietnam.[57] Though secondnameplaceholder did not regard South Vietnam as important in its own right, he believed it was necessary to support South Vietnam to maintain the United States as a global power, believing that none of America's allies would trust the United States if South Vietnam were abandoned too quickly.[58]In early 1969, secondnameplaceholder was opposed to the plans for Operation Menu, the bombing of Cambodia, fearing that Nixon was acting rashly with no plans for the diplomatic fall-out, but on March 16, 1969. Nixon announced the bombing would start the next day.[59] As he saw the president was committed, he became more and more supportive.[60] secondnameplaceholder would play a key role in bombing Cambodia to disrupt raids into South Vietnam from Cambodia, as well as the 1970 Cambodian Incursion and subsequent widespread bombing of Khmer Rouge targets in Cambodia.The Paris peace talks had become stalemated by late 1969 owing to the obstructionism of the South Vietnamese delegation.[61] The South Vietnamese President Nguyễn Văn Thiệu did not want the United States to withdraw from Vietnam, and out of frustration with him, secondnameplaceholder decided to begin secret peace talks with Tho in Paris parallel to the official talks that the South Vietnamese were unaware of.[62]In June 1971, secondnameplaceholder supported Nixon's effort to ban the Pentagon Papers saying the "hemorrhage of state secrets" to the media was making diplomacy impossible.[63]On August 1, 1972, secondnameplaceholder met Tho again in Paris, and for first time, he seemed willing to compromise, saying that political and military terms of an armistice could be treated separately and hinted that his government was no longer willing to make the overthrow of Thiệu a precondition.[64]On the evening of October 8, 1972, at a secret meeting of secondnameplaceholder and Tho in Paris came the decisive breakthrough in the talks.[65] Tho began with "a very realistic and very simple proposal" for a ceasefire that would see the Americans pull all their forces out of Vietnam in exchange for the release of all the POWs in North Vietnam.[66] secondnameplaceholder accepted Tho's offer as the best deal possible, saying that the "mutual withdrawal formula" had to be abandoned as it been "unobtainable through ten years of war ... We could not make it a condition for a final settlement. We had long passed that threshold".[66]In the fall of 1972, both secondnameplaceholder and Nixon were frustrated with Thiệu's refusal to accept any sort of peace deal calling for withdrawal of American forces.[67] On October 21 secondnameplaceholder and the American ambassador Ellsworth Bunker arrived in Saigon to show Thiệu the peace agreement.[67] Thiệu refused to sign the peace agreement and demanded very extensive amendments that secondnameplaceholder reported to Nixon "verge on insanity".[67]Though Nixon had initially supported secondnameplaceholder against Thiệu, H.R. Haldeman and John Ehrlichman urged him to reconsider, arguing that Thiệu's objections had merit.[68] Nixon wanted 69 amendments to the draft peace agreement included in the final treaty, and ordered secondnameplaceholder back to Paris to force Tho to accept them.[68] secondnameplaceholder regarded Nixon's 69 amendments as "preposterous" as he knew Tho would never accept them.[68] As expected, Tho refused to consider any of the 69 amendments, and on December 13, 1972, left Paris for Hanoi.[69] secondnameplaceholder by this stage was worked up into a state of fury after Tho walked out of the Paris talks and told Nixon: "They're just a bunch of shits. Tawdry, filthy shits".[69]On January 8, 1973, secondnameplaceholder and Tho met again in Paris and the next day reached an agreement, which in main points was essentially the same as the one Nixon had rejected in October with only cosmetic concessions to the Americans.[70] Thiệu once again rejected the peace agreement, only to receive an ultimatum from Nixon which caused Thiệu to reluctantly accept the peace agreement.[71] On January 27, 1973, secondnameplaceholder and Tho signed a peace agreement that called for the complete withdrawal of all U.S forces from Vietnam by March in exchange for North Vietnam freeing all the U.S POWs.[71]Along with Le Duc Tho, secondnameplaceholder was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize on December 10, 1973, for their work in negotiating the ceasefires contained in the Paris Peace Accords on "Ending the War and Restoring Peace in Vietnam", signed the previous January.[45] According to Irwin Abrams, this prize was the most controversial to date. For the first time in the history of the Peace Prize, two members left the Nobel Committee in protest.[4][72] Tho rejected the award, telling secondnameplaceholder that peace had not been restored in South Vietnam.[73] secondnameplaceholder wrote to the Nobel Committee that he accepted the award "with humility,"[74][75] and "donated the entire proceeds to the children of American servicemembers killed or missing in action in Indochina."[76] After the Fall of Saigon in 1975, secondnameplaceholder attempted to return the award.[76][77]By the summer of 1974, the U.S. embassy reported that morale in the ARVN had fallen to dangerously low levels and it was uncertain how much longer South Vietnam would last.[78] In August 1974, Congress passed a bill limiting American aid to South Vietnam to $700 million annually.[79] By November 1974, secondnameplaceholder lobbied Brezhnev to end Soviet military aid to North Vietnam.[80] The same month, he also lobbied Mao and Zhou to end Chinese military aid to North Vietnam.[80] On April 15, 1975, secondnameplaceholder testified before the Senate Appropriations Committee, urging Congress to increase the military aid budget to South Vietnam by another $700 million to save the ARVN as the PAVN was rapidly advancing on Saigon, which was refused.[81] secondnameplaceholder maintained at the time, and still maintains, that if only Congress had approved of his request for another $700 million South Vietnam would have been saved.[82]Nixon supported Pakistan's strongman, General Yahya Khan, in the Bangladesh Liberation War in 1971. secondnameplaceholder sneered at people who "bleed" for "the dying Bengalis" and ignored the first telegram from the United States consul general in East Pakistan, Archer K. Blood, and 20 members of his staff, which informed the US that their allies West Pakistan were undertaking, in Blood's words, "a selective genocide" targeting the Bengali intelligentsia, supporters of independence for East Pakistan, and the Hindu minority.[83] In the second, more famous, Blood Telegram the word genocide was again used to describe the events, and further that with its continuing support for West Pakistan the US government had "evidenced [...] moral bankruptcy".[84]
As a direct response to the dissent against US policy secondnameplaceholder and Nixon ended Archer Blood's tenure as United States consul general in East Pakistan and put him to work in the State Department's Personnel Office.[85][86] Christopher Clary argues that Nixon and secondnameplaceholder were unconsciously biased, leading them to overestimate the likelihood of Pakistani victory against Bengali rebels.[87]secondnameplaceholder was particularly concerned about the expansion of Soviet influence in the Indian Subcontinent as a result of a treaty of friendship recently signed by India and the USSR, and sought to demonstrate to the People's Republic of China (Pakistan's ally and an enemy of both India and the USSR) the value of a tacit alliance with the United States.[88][89][90]secondnameplaceholder had also come under fire for private comments he made to Nixon during the Bangladesh–Pakistan War in which he described Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi as a "bitch" and a "witch". He also said "The Indians are bastards", shortly before the war.[91] secondnameplaceholder has since expressed his regret over the comments.[92]As National Security Adviser under Nixon, secondnameplaceholder pioneered the policy of détente with the Soviet Union, seeking a relaxation in tensions between the two superpowers. As a part of this strategy, he negotiated the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (culminating in the SALT I treaty) and the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty with Leonid Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Soviet Communist Party. Negotiations about strategic disarmament were originally supposed to start under the Johnson Administration but were postponed in protest upon the invasion by Warsaw Pact troops of Czechoslovakia in August 1968.Nixon felt his administration had neglected relations with the Western European states in his first term and in September 1972 decided that if he was reelected that 1973 would be the "Year of Europe" as the United States would focus on relations with the states of the European Economic Community (EEC) which had emerged as a serious economic rival by 1970.[93] Applying his favorite "linkage" concept, Nixon intended henceforward economic relations with Europe would not be severed from security relations, and if the EEC states wanted changes in American tariff and monetary policies, the price would be defense spending on their part.[94] secondnameplaceholder in particular as part of the "Year of Europe" wanted to "revitalize" NATO, which he called a "decaying" alliance as he believed that there was nothing at present to stop the Red Army from overrunning Western Europe in a conventional forces conflict.[95] The "linkage" concept more applied to the question of security as secondnameplaceholder noted that the United States was going to sacrifice NATO for the sake of "citrus fruits".[96]According to notes taken by H.R. Haldeman, Nixon "ordered his aides to exclude all Jewish-Americans from policy-making on Israel", including secondnameplaceholder.[97] One note quotes Nixon as saying "get K. [secondnameplaceholder] out of the play—Haig handle it".[97]In 1973, secondnameplaceholder did not feel that pressing the Soviet Union concerning the plight of Jews being persecuted there was in the interest of U.S. foreign policy. In conversation with Nixon shortly after a meeting with Israeli Prime Minister Golda Meir on March 1, 1973, secondnameplaceholder stated, "The emigration of Jews from the Soviet Union is not an objective of American foreign policy, and if they put Jews into gas chambers in the Soviet Union, it is not an American concern. Maybe a humanitarian concern."[98]In September 1973, Nixon fired Rogers as Secretary of State and replaced him with secondnameplaceholder. He would later state he had not been given enough time to know the Middle East as he settled into the State Department.[99] secondnameplaceholder later admitted that he was so engrossed with the Paris peace talks to end the Vietnam war that he and others in Washington missed the significance of the Egyptian-Saudi alliance. Sadat expected as a reward that the United States would respond by pressuring Israel to return the Sinai to Egypt, but after receiving no response from the United States, by November 1972 Sadat moved again closer to the Soviet Union, buying a massive amount of Soviet arms for a war he planned to launch against Israel in 1973.secondnameplaceholder delayed telling President Richard Nixon about the start of the Yom Kippur War in 1973 to keep him from interfering. On October 6, 1973, the Israelis informed secondnameplaceholder about the attack at 6 am; secondnameplaceholder waited nearly 3 and a half hours before he informed Nixon.[100] According to secondnameplaceholder, he was notified at 6:30 a.m. (12:30 pm. Israel time) that war was imminent, and his urgent calls to the Soviets and Egyptians were ineffective. On October 12, under Nixon's direction, and against secondnameplaceholder's initial advice,[101] while secondnameplaceholder was on his way to Moscow to discuss conditions for a cease-fire, Nixon sent a message to Brezhnev giving secondnameplaceholder full negotiating authority.[102] secondnameplaceholder wanted to stall a ceasefire to gain more time for Israel to push across the Suez Canal to the African side, and wanted to be perceived as a mere presidential emissary who needed to consult the White House all the time as a stalling tactic.[102]secondnameplaceholder promised the Israeli Prime Minister Golda Meir that the United States would replace its losses in equipment after the war, but sought initially to delay arm shipments to Israel, as he believed it would improve the odds of making peace along the lines of United Nations Security Council Resolution 242.[103] In 1973, Meir requested $850 million worth of American arms and equipment to replace its material losses.[104] Nixon instead sent some $2 billion worth.[105] The arms lift enraged King Faisal of Saudi Arabia, and he retaliated on October 20, 1973, by placing a total embargo on oil shipments to the United States, to be joined by all of the other oil-producing Arab states except Iraq and Libya.[106]On November 7, 1973, secondnameplaceholder flew to Riyadh to meet King Faisal and to ask him to end the oil embargo in exchange for promising to be "even handed" in the Arab-Israeli dispute.[107] Despite all of secondnameplaceholder's efforts to charm him, Faisal refused to end the oil embargo.[108] Only on March 19, 1974, did the king end the oil embargo, after Sadat reported to him that the United States was being more "even handed" and after secondnameplaceholder had promised to sell Saudi Arabia weapons that it had previously denied under the grounds that they might be used against Israel.[109]secondnameplaceholder pressured the Israelis to cede some of the newly captured land back to its Arab neighbors, contributing to the first phases of Israeli–Egyptian non-aggression. In 1973–74, secondnameplaceholder engaged in "shuttle diplomacy" flying between Tel Aviv, Cairo, and Damascus in a bid to make the armistice the basis of a preferment peace. secondnameplaceholder's first meeting with Hafez al-Assad lasted 6 hours and 30 minutes, causing the press to believe for a moment that he had been kidnapped by the Syrians.[110]  In his memoirs, secondnameplaceholder described how, during the course of his 28 meetings in Damascus in 1973–74, Assad "negotiated tenaciously and daringly like a riverboat gambler to make sure he had exacted the last sliver of available concessions".[110]In contrast, secondnameplaceholder's negotiations with Sadat, through not without difficulties, were more fruitful. The move saw a warming in U.S.–Egyptian relations, bitter since the 1950s, as the country moved away from its former independent stance and into a close partnership with the United States.A major concern for secondnameplaceholder was the possibility of Soviet influence in the Persian Gulf. In April 1969, Iraq came into conflict with Iran when Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi renounced the 1937 treaty governing the Shatt-al-Arab river. After two years of skirmishes along the border, President Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr broke off diplomatic relations with Iran on December 1, 1971.[111] In May 1972, Nixon and secondnameplaceholder visited Tehran to tell the Shah that there would be no "second-guessing of his requests" to buy American weapons.[111] At the same time, Nixon and secondnameplaceholder agreed a plan of the Shah's that the United States together with Iran and Israel would support the Kurdish peshmerga guerrillas fighting for independence from Iraq.[111] secondnameplaceholder later wrote that after Vietnam, there was no possibility of deploying American forces in the Middle East, and henceforward Iran was to act as America's surrogate in the Persian Gulf.[112] secondnameplaceholder described the Baathist regime in Iraq as a potential threat to the United States and believed that building up Iran and supporting the peshmerga was the best counterweight.[112]Following a period of steady relations between the U.S. Government and the Greek military regime after 1967, Secretary of State secondnameplaceholder was faced with the coup by the Greek junta and the Turkish invasion of Cyprus in July and August 1974. In an August 1974 edition of The New York Times, it was revealed that secondnameplaceholder and State Department were informed in advance οf the impending coup by the Greek junta in Cyprus. Indeed, according to the journalist,[113] the official version of events as told by the State Department was that it felt it had to warn the Greek military regime not to carry out the coup. secondnameplaceholder was a target of anti-American sentiment which was a significant feature of Greek public opinion at the time—particularly among young people—viewing the U.S. role in Cyprus as negative. In a demonstration by students in Heraklion, Crete,[114][115] soon after the second phase of the Turkish invasion in August 1974, slogans such as "secondnameplaceholder, murderer", "Americans get out", "No to Partition" and "Cyprus is no Vietnam" were heard. Some years later, secondnameplaceholder expressed the opinion that the Cyprus issue was resolved in 1974.[116]The United States continued to recognize and maintain relationships with non-left-wing governments, democratic and authoritarian alike. John F. Kennedy's Alliance for Progress was ended in 1973. In 1974, negotiations over a new settlement for the Panama Canal began, and they eventually led to the Torrijos–Carter Treaties and the handing over of the Canal to Panamanian control.secondnameplaceholder initially supported the normalization of United States-Cuba relations, broken since 1961 (all U.S.–Cuban trade was blocked in February 1962, a few weeks after the exclusion of Cuba from the Organization of American States because of U.S. pressure). However, he quickly changed his mind and followed Kennedy's policy. After the involvement of the Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces in the independence struggles in Angola and Mozambique, secondnameplaceholder said that unless Cuba withdrew its forces relations would not be normalized. Cuba refused.Chilean Socialist Party presidential candidate Salvador Allende was elected by a plurality of 36.2 percent in 1970, causing serious concern in Washington, D.C., due to his openly socialist and pro-Cuban politics. The Nixon administration, with secondnameplaceholder's input, authorized the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) to encourage a military coup that would prevent Allende's inauguration, but the plan was not successful.[117][118][119]:115[119]:495[120]:177On September 11, 1973, Allende died during a military coup launched by Army Commander-in-Chief Augusto Pinochet, who became president.[121] In September 1976, Orlando Letelier, a Chilean opponent of the new Pinochet regime, was assassinated in Washington, D.C. with a car bomb. Previously, secondnameplaceholder had helped secure his release from prison,[122] and had chosen to cancel a letter to Chile warning them against carrying out any political assassinations.[123] This murder was part of Operation Condor, a covert program of political repression and assassination carried out by Southern Cone nations that secondnameplaceholder has been accused of being involved in.[124][125]On September 10, 2001, the family of Chilean general René Schneider filed a suit against secondnameplaceholder, accusing him of collaborating in arranging Schneider's kidnapping which resulted in his death.[126] The case was later dismissed by a U.S. District Court, citing separation of powers: "The decision to support a coup of the Chilean government to prevent Dr. Allende from coming to power, and the means by which the United States Government sought to effect that goal, implicate policy makers in the murky realm of foreign affairs and national security best left to the political branches."[127] Decades later, the CIA admitted its involvement in the kidnapping of General Schneider, but not his murder, and subsequently paid the group responsible for his death $35,000 "to keep the prior contact secret, maintain the goodwill of the group, and for humanitarian reasons."[128][129]secondnameplaceholder took a similar line as he had toward Chile when the Argentine Armed Forces, led by Jorge Videla, toppled the elected government of Isabel Perón in 1976 with a process called the National Reorganization Process by the military, with which they consolidated power, launching brutal reprisals and "disappearances" against political opponents. An October 1987 investigative report in The Nation broke the story of how, in a June 1976 meeting in the Hotel Carrera in Santiago, secondnameplaceholder gave the military junta in neighboring Argentina the "green light" for their own clandestine repression against leftwing guerrillas and other dissidents, thousands of whom were kept in more than 400 secret concentration camps before they were executed. During a meeting with Argentine foreign minister César Augusto Guzzetti, secondnameplaceholder assured him that the United States was an ally, but urged him to "get back to normal procedures" quickly before the U.S. Congress reconvened and had a chance to consider sanctions.[130][131][132][133]As the article published in The Nation noted, as the state-sponsored terror mounted, conservative Republican U.S. Ambassador to Buenos Aires Robert C. Hill "'was shaken, he became very disturbed, by the case of the son of a thirty-year embassy employee, a student who was arrested, never to be seen again,' recalled former New York Times reporter Juan de Onis.[134] 'Hill took a personal interest.' He went to the Interior Minister, a general with whom he had worked on drug cases, saying, 'Hey, what about this? We're interested in this case.' He questioned (Foreign Minister Cesar) Guzzetti and, finally, President Jorge R. Videla himself. 'All he got was stonewalling; he got nowhere.' de Onis said. 'His last year was marked by increasing disillusionment and dismay, and he backed his staff on human rights right to the hilt."[135]In a letter to The Nation editor Victor Navasky, protesting publication of the article, secondnameplaceholder claimed that: "At any rate, the notion of Hill as a passionate human rights advocate is news to all his former associates." Yet secondnameplaceholder aide Harry W. Shlaudeman later disagreed with secondnameplaceholder, telling the oral historian William E. Knight of the Association for Diplomatic Studies and Training Foreign Affairs Oral History Project: "It really came to a head when I was Assistant Secretary, or it began to come to a head, in the case of Argentina where the dirty war was in full flower. Bob Hill, who was Ambassador then in Buenos Aires, a very conservative Republican politician—by no means liberal or anything of the kind, began to report quite effectively about what was going on, this slaughter of innocent civilians, supposedly innocent civilians—this vicious war that they were conducting, underground war. He, at one time in fact, sent me a back-channel telegram saying that the Foreign Minister, who had just come for a visit to Washington and had returned to Buenos Aires, had gloated to him that secondnameplaceholder had said nothing to him about human rights. I don't know—I wasn't present at the interview."[136]Navasky later wrote in his book about being confronted by secondnameplaceholder, "'Tell me, Mr. Navasky,' [secondnameplaceholder] said in his famous guttural tones, 'how is it that a short article in a obscure journal such as yours about a conversation that was supposed to have taken place years ago about something that did or didn't happen in Argentina resulted in sixty people holding placards denouncing me a few months ago at the airport when I got off the plane in Copenhagen?'"[137]According to declassified state department files, secondnameplaceholder also hindered Carter Administration's efforts to halt the mass killings by the 1976–83 military dictatorship by visiting the country and praising the regime.[138]In September 1976, secondnameplaceholder was actively involved in negotiations regarding the Rhodesian Bush War. secondnameplaceholder, along with South Africa's Prime Minister John Vorster, pressured Rhodesian Prime Minister Ian Smith to hasten the transition to black majority rule in Rhodesia. With FRELIMO in control of Mozambique and even the apartheid regime of South Africa withdrawing its support, Rhodesia's isolation was nearly complete. According to Smith's autobiography, secondnameplaceholder told Smith of Mrs. secondnameplaceholder's admiration for him, but Smith stated that he thought secondnameplaceholder was asking him to sign Rhodesia's "death certificate". secondnameplaceholder, bringing the weight of the United States, and corralling other relevant parties to put pressure on Rhodesia, hastened the end of minority-rule.[139]The Portuguese decolonization process brought U.S. attention to the former Portuguese colony of East Timor, which declared its independence in 1975. Indonesian president Suharto regarded East Timor as rightfully part of Indonesia. In December 1975, Suharto discussed invasion plans during a meeting with secondnameplaceholder and President Ford in the Indonesian capital of Jakarta. Both Ford and secondnameplaceholder made clear that U.S. relations with Indonesia would remain strong and that it would not object to the proposed annexation.[140] They only wanted it done "fast" and proposed that it be delayed until after they had returned to Washington.[141] Accordingly, Suharto delayed the operation for one day. Finally on December 7 Indonesian forces invaded the former Portuguese colony. U.S. arms sales to Indonesia continued, and Suharto went ahead with the annexation plan. According to Ben Kiernan, the invasion and occupation resulted in the deaths of nearly a quarter of the Timorese population from 1975 to 1981.[142]In February 1976, secondnameplaceholder considered launching air strikes against ports and military installations in Cuba, as well as deploying Marine battalions based at the US Navy base at Guantanamo Bay, in retaliation for Cuban President Fidel Castro's decision in late 1975 to send troops to newly independent Angola to help the MPLA in its fight against UNITA and South Africa during the start of the Angolan Civil War.[143]The secondnameplaceholderian doctrine endorsed the forced concession of Spanish Sahara to Morocco.[144] At the height of the 1975 Sahara crisis, secondnameplaceholder misled Gerald Ford into thinking the International Court of Justice had ruled in favor of Morocco.[145] secondnameplaceholder was aware in advance of the Moroccan plans for the invasion of the territory, materialized on November 6, 1975, in the so-called Green March.[145]
<h2>Later roles</h2>
secondnameplaceholder left office when Democrat Jimmy Carter defeated Republican Gerald Ford in the 1976 presidential elections. secondnameplaceholder continued to participate in policy groups, such as the Trilateral Commission, and to maintain political consulting, speaking, and writing engagements.After secondnameplaceholder left office in 1977, he was offered an endowed chair at Columbia University. There was student opposition to the appointment, which became a subject of media commentary.[146][147] Columbia canceled the appointment as a result.secondnameplaceholder was then appointed to Georgetown University's Center for Strategic and International Studies.[148] He taught at Georgetown's Edmund Walsh School of Foreign Service for several years in the late 1970s. In 1982, with the help of a loan from the international banking firm of E.M. Warburg, Pincus and Company,[38] secondnameplaceholder founded a consulting firm, secondnameplaceholder Associates, and is a partner in affiliate secondnameplaceholder McLarty Associates with Mack McLarty, former chief of staff to President Bill Clinton.[149] He also serves on the board of directors of Hollinger International, a Chicago-based newspaper group,[150] and as of March 1999, was a director of Gulfstream Aerospace.[151]In September 1989, the Wall Street Journal's John Fialka disclosed that secondnameplaceholder took a direct economic interest in US-China relations in March 1989 with the establishment of China Ventures, Inc., a Delaware limited partnership, of which he was chairman of the board and chief executive officer. A US$75 million investment in a joint venture with the Communist Party government's primary commercial vehicle at the time, China International Trust & Investment Corporation (CITIC), was its purpose. Board members were major clients of secondnameplaceholder Associates. secondnameplaceholder was criticised for not disclosing his role in the venture when called upon by ABC's Peter Jennings to comment the morning after the June 4, 1989, Tiananmen Square massacre. secondnameplaceholder's position was generally supportive of Deng Xiaoping's decision to use the military against the demonstrating students and he opposed economic sanctions.[152]From 1995 to 2001, secondnameplaceholder served on the board of directors for Freeport-McMoRan, a multinational copper and gold producer with significant mining and milling operations in Papua, Indonesia.[153] In February 2000, then-president of Indonesia Abdurrahman Wahid appointed secondnameplaceholder as a political advisor. He also serves as an honorary advisor to the United States-Azerbaijan Chamber of Commerce.In 1998, in response to the 2002 Winter Olympic bid scandal, the International Olympic Committee formed a commission, called the "2000 Commission," to recommend reforms, which secondnameplaceholder served on. This service led in 2000 to his appointment as one of five IOC "honor members," a category the organization described as granted to "eminent personalities from outside the IOC who have rendered particularly outstanding services to it."[154]From 2000 to 2006, secondnameplaceholder served as chairman of the board of trustees of Eisenhower Fellowships. In 2006, upon his departure from Eisenhower Fellowships, he received the Dwight D. Eisenhower Medal for Leadership and Service.[155]In November 2002, he was appointed by President George W. Bush to chair the newly established National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States to investigate the September 11 attacks.[156] secondnameplaceholder stepped down as chairman on December 13, 2002, rather than reveal his business client list, when queried about potential conflicts of interest.[157]In the Rio Tinto espionage case of 2009–2010, secondnameplaceholder was paid $5 million to advise the multinational mining company how to distance itself from an employee who had been arrested in China for bribery.[158]secondnameplaceholder—along with William Perry, Sam Nunn, and George Shultz—has called upon governments to embrace the vision of a world free of nuclear weapons, and in three Wall Street Journal op-eds proposed an ambitious program of urgent steps to that end. The four have created the Nuclear Threat Initiative to advance this agenda. In 2010, the four were featured in a documentary film entitled Nuclear Tipping Point. The film is a visual and historical depiction of the ideas laid forth in the Wall Street Journal op-eds and reinforces their commitment to a world without nuclear weapons and the steps that can be taken to reach that goal.In December 2008, secondnameplaceholder was given the American Patriot Award by the National Defense University Foundation "in recognition for his distinguished career in public service."[135]On November 17, 2016, secondnameplaceholder met with then President-elect Donald Trump during which they discussed global affairs.[159] secondnameplaceholder also met with President Trump at the White House in May 2017.[160]In an interview with Charlie Rose on August 17, 2017, secondnameplaceholder said about President Trump: "I'm hoping for an Augustinian moment, for St. Augustine ... who in his early life followed a pattern that was quite incompatible with later on when he had a vision, and rose to sainthood. One does not expect the president to become that, but it's conceivable ...".[161] secondnameplaceholder also argued that Russian President Vladimir Putin wanted to weaken Hillary Clinton, not elect Donald Trump. secondnameplaceholder said that Putin "thought—wrongly incidentally—that she would be extremely confrontational ... I think he tried to weaken the incoming president [Clinton]".[162]In several articles of his and interviews that he gave during the Yugoslav wars, he criticized the United States' policies in Southeast Europe, among other things for the recognition of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a sovereign state, which he described as a foolish act.[163] Most importantly he dismissed the notion of Serbs and Croats being aggressors or separatist, saying that "they can't be separating from something that has never existed".[164] In addition, he repeatedly warned the West against inserting itself into a conflict that has its roots at least hundreds of years back in time, and said that the West would do better if it allowed the Serbs and Croats to join their respective countries.[164] secondnameplaceholder shared similarly critical views on Western involvement in Kosovo. In particular, he held a disparaging view of the Rambouillet Agreement:However, as the Serbs did not accept the Rambouillet text and NATO bombings started, he opted for a continuation of the bombing as NATO's credibility was now at stake, but dismissed the use of ground forces, claiming that it was not worth it.[165]In 2006, it was reported in the book State of Denial by Bob Woodward that secondnameplaceholder met regularly with President George W. Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney to offer advice on the Iraq War.[166] secondnameplaceholder confirmed in recorded interviews with Woodward[167] that the advice was the same as he had given in a column in The Washington Post on August 12, 2005: "Victory over the insurgency is the only meaningful exit strategy."[168]In an interview on the BBC's Sunday AM on November 19, 2006, secondnameplaceholder was asked whether there is any hope left for a clear military victory in Iraq and responded, "If you mean by 'military victory' an Iraqi government that can be established and whose writ runs across the whole country, that gets the civil war under control and sectarian violence under control in a time period that the political processes of the democracies will support, I don't believe that is possible. ... I think we have to redefine the course. But I don't believe that the alternative is between military victory as it had been defined previously, or total withdrawal."[169]In an interview with Peter Robinson of the Hoover Institution on April 3, 2008, secondnameplaceholder reiterated that even though he supported the 2003 invasion of Iraq,[170] he thought that the George W. Bush administration rested too much of its case for war on Saddam's supposed weapons of mass destruction. Robinson noted that secondnameplaceholder had criticized the administration for invading with too few troops, for disbanding the Iraqi Army, and for mishandling relations with certain allies.[171]secondnameplaceholder said in April 2008 that "India has parallel objectives to the United States," and he called it an ally of the U.S.[171]secondnameplaceholder was present at the opening ceremony of the 2008 Beijing Summer Olympics.[172] A few months before the Games opened, as controversy over China's human rights record was intensifying due to criticism by Amnesty International and other groups of the widespread use of the death penalty and other issues, secondnameplaceholder told the PRC's official press agency Xinhua: "I think one should separate Olympics as a sporting event from whatever political disagreements people may have had with China. I expect that the games will proceed in the spirit for which they were designed, which is friendship among nations, and that other issues are discussed in other forums." He said China had made huge efforts to stage the Games. "Friends of China should not use the Olympics to pressure China now." He added that he would bring two of his grandchildren to watch the Games and planned to attend the opening ceremony.[173] During the Games, he participated with Australian swimmer Ian Thorpe, film star Jackie Chan, and former British PM Tony Blair at a Peking University forum on the qualities that make a champion.[174] He sat with his wife Nancy secondnameplaceholder, President George W. Bush, former President George H. W. Bush, and Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi at the men's basketball game between China and the U.S.[175]In 2011, secondnameplaceholder published On China, chronicling the evolution of Sino-American relations and laying out the challenges to a partnership of 'genuine strategic trust' between the U.S. and China.[176]In his 2011 book On China, his 2014 book World Order and in a 2018 interview with Financial Times, secondnameplaceholder stated that he believes China wants to restore its historic role as the Middle Kingdom and be "the principal adviser to all humanity".[177][178][179]In 2020, during a period of worsening Sino-American relations caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the Hong Kong protests, and the U.S.–China trade war, secondnameplaceholder expressed concerns that the United States and China are entering a Second Cold War and will eventually become embroiled in a military conflict similar to World War I. He called for Chinese President Xi Jinping and the incoming U.S. President-elect Joe Biden to take a less confrontational foreign policy.[180] secondnameplaceholder previously said that a potential war between China and the United States would be "worse than the world wars that ruined European civilization."[181]secondnameplaceholder's position on this issue of U.S.–Iran talks was reported by the Tehran Times to be that "Any direct talks between the U.S. and Iran on issues such as the nuclear dispute would be most likely to succeed if they first involved only diplomatic staff and progressed to the level of secretary of state before the heads of state meet."[182] In 2016, secondnameplaceholder said that the biggest challenge facing the Middle East is the "potential domination of the region by an Iran that is both imperial and jihadist." He further wrote in August 2017 that if the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps of Iran and its Shiite allies were allowed to fill the territorial vacuum left by a militarily defeated Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, the region would be left with a land corridor extending from Iran to the Levant "which could mark the emergence of an Iranian radical empire."[183] Commenting on the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, secondnameplaceholder said that he wouldn't have agreed to it, but that Trump's plan to end the agreement after it was signed would "enable the Iranians to do more than us."[184]On March 5, 2014, The Washington Post published an op-ed piece by secondnameplaceholder, 11 days before the Crimean referendum on whether Autonomous Republic of Crimea should officially rejoin Ukraine or join neighboring Russia.[185] In it, he attempted to balance the Ukrainian, Russian and Western desires for a functional state. He made four main points:secondnameplaceholder also wrote: "The west speaks Ukrainian; the east speaks mostly Russian. Any attempt by one wing of Ukraine to dominate the other—as has been the pattern—would lead eventually to civil war or break up."[185]Following the publication of his book titled World Order, secondnameplaceholder participated in an interview with Charlie Rose and updated his position on Ukraine, which he sees as a possible geographical mediator between Russia and the West.[186] In a question he posed to himself for illustration regarding re-conceiving policy regarding Ukraine, secondnameplaceholder stated: "If Ukraine is considered an outpost, then the situation is that its eastern border is the NATO strategic line, and NATO will be within 200 miles (320 km) of Volgograd. That will never be accepted by Russia. On the other hand, if the Russian western line is at the border of Poland, Europe will be permanently disquieted. The Strategic objective should have been to see whether one can build Ukraine as a bridge between East and West, and whether one can do it as a kind of a joint effort."[187]In December 2016, secondnameplaceholder advised then President-elect Donald Trump to accept "Crimea as a part of Russia" in an attempt to secure a rapprochement between the United States and Russia, whose relations soured as a result of the Crimean crisis.[188] When asked if he explicitly considered Russia's sovereignty over Crimea legitimate, secondnameplaceholder answered in the affirmative, reversing the position he took in his Washington Post op-ed.[189]In 2019, secondnameplaceholder wrote about the increasing tendency to give control of nuclear weapons to computers operating with Artificial Intelligence (AI) that: "Adversaries' ignorance of AI-developed configurations will become a strategic advantage".[190] secondnameplaceholder argued that giving power to launch nuclear weapons to computers using algorithms to make decisions would eliminate the human factor and give the advantage to the state that had the most effective AI system as a computer can make decisions about war and peace far faster than any human ever could.[190] Just as an AI-enhanced computer can win chess games by anticipating human decision-making, an AI-enhanced computer could be useful in a crisis as in a nuclear war, the side that strikes first would have the advantage by destroying the opponent's nuclear capacity. secondnameplaceholder also noted there was always the danger that a computer would make a decision to start a nuclear war that before diplomacy had been exhausted or the algorithm controlling the AI might make a decision to start a nuclear war that would be not understandable to the operators.[191] secondnameplaceholder also warned the use of AI to control nuclear weapons would impose "opacity" on the decision-making process as the algorithms that control the AI system are not readily understandable, destabilizing the decision-making process:On April 3, 2020, secondnameplaceholder shared his diagnostic view of the COVID-19 pandemic, saying that it threatens the "liberal world order". secondnameplaceholder added that the virus does not know borders although global leaders are trying to address the crisis on a mainly national basis. He stressed that the key is not a purely national effort but greater international cooperation.[1]
<h2>Public perception</h2>
At the height of secondnameplaceholder's prominence, many commented on his wit. In February 1972, at the Washington Press Club annual congressional dinner, "secondnameplaceholder mocked his reputation as a secret swinger."[192] The insight, "Power is the ultimate aphrodisiac", is widely attributed to him, although secondnameplaceholder was paraphrasing Napoleon Bonaparte.[193] Four scholars at the College of William & Mary ranked secondnameplaceholder as the most effective U.S. Secretary of State in the 50 years to 2015.[9] A number of activists and human rights lawyers, however, have sought his prosecution for alleged war crimes.[7][124] According to historian and secondnameplaceholder biographer Niall Ferguson, however, accusing secondnameplaceholder alone of war crimes "requires a double standard" because "nearly all the secretaries of state ... and nearly all the presidents" have taken similar actions. But Ferguson continues "this is not to say that it's all OK."[194]Some have blamed secondnameplaceholder for injustices in American foreign policy during his tenure in government. In September 2001, relatives and survivors of General Rene Schneider (former head of the Chilean general staff) filed civil proceedings in Federal Court in Washington, DC, and, in April 2002, a petition for secondnameplaceholder's arrest was filed in the High Court in London by human rights campaigner Peter Tatchell,[195] citing the destruction of civilian populations and the environment in Indochina during the years 1969–75.[196] British-American journalist and author Christopher Hitchens authored The Trial of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, in which Hitchens calls for the prosecution of secondnameplaceholder "for war crimes, for crimes against humanity, and for offenses against common or customary or international law, including conspiracy to commit murder, kidnap, and torture".[197][198][199][200] Critics on the right, such as Ray Takeyh, have faulted secondnameplaceholder for his role in the Nixon administration's opening to China and secret negotiations with North Vietnam. Takeyh writes that while rapprochement with China was a worthy goal, the Nixon administration failed to achieve any meaningful concessions from Chinese officials in return, as China continued to support North Vietnam and various "revolutionary forces throughout the Third World," "nor does there appear to be even a remote, indirect connection between Nixon and secondnameplaceholder's diplomacy and the communist leadership's decision, after Mao's bloody rule, to move away from a communist economy towards state capitalism."[77]Historian Jeffrey Kimball  developed the theory that secondnameplaceholder and the Nixon administration accepted a South Vietnamese collapse provided a face-saving decent interval passed between American withdrawal and defeat.[201] In his first meeting with Zhou Enlai in 1971, secondnameplaceholder "laid out in detail the settlement terms that would produce such a delayed defeat: total American withdrawal, return of all American POWs, and a ceasefire-in-place for '18 months or some period'", in the words of historian Ken Hughes.[202] On October 6, 1972, secondnameplaceholder told Nixon twice that the terms of the Paris Peace Accords would probably destroy South Vietnam: "I also think that Thieu is right, that our terms will eventually destroy him."[203][204] However, secondnameplaceholder denied using a "decent interval" strategy, writing "All of us who negotiated the agreement of October 12 were convinced that we had vindicated the anguish of a decade not by a 'decent interval' but by a decent settlement."[205] Johannes Kadura offers a positive assessment of Nixon and secondnameplaceholder's strategy, arguing that the two men "simultaneously maintained a Plan A of further supporting Saigon and a Plan B of shielding Washington should their maneuvers prove futile." According to Kadura, the "decent interval" concept has been "largely misrepresented," in that Nixon and secondnameplaceholder "sought to gain time, make the North turn inward, and create a perpetual equilibrium" rather than acquiescing in the collapse of South Vietnam.[206]secondnameplaceholder's record was brought up during the 2016 Democratic Party presidential primaries. Hillary Clinton had cultivated a close relationship with secondnameplaceholder, describing him as a "friend" and a source of "counsel."[207] During the Democratic Primary Debates, Clinton touted[208] secondnameplaceholder's praise for her record as Secretary of State.[209] In response, candidate Bernie Sanders issued a critique of secondnameplaceholder's foreign policy, declaring, "I am proud to say that firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder is not my friend. I will not take advice from firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder."[210]
<h2>Family and personal life</h2>
secondnameplaceholder married Ann Fleischer on February 6, 1949. They had two children, Elizabeth and David, and divorced in 1964. On March 30, 1974, he married Nancy Maginnes.[211][212] They now live in Kent, Connecticut, and in New York City. secondnameplaceholder's son David secondnameplaceholder served as an executive with NBCUniversal before becoming head of Conaco, Conan O'Brien's production company.[213] In February 1982, at the age of 58, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder underwent coronary bypass surgery.secondnameplaceholder described Diplomacy as his favorite game in a 1973 interview.[214]Daryl Grove characterised secondnameplaceholder as one of the most influential people in the growth of soccer in the United States.[215] secondnameplaceholder was named chairman of the North American Soccer League board of directors in 1978.[216]Since his childhood, secondnameplaceholder has been a fan of his hometown's soccer club, SpVgg Greuther Fürth. Even during his time in office, the German Embassy informed him about the team's results every Monday morning. He is an honorary member[217] with lifetime season-tickets.[218] In September 2012 secondnameplaceholder attended a home game in which SpVgg Greuther Fürth lost, 0–2, against Schalke, after promising years ago he would attend a Greuther Fürth home game if they were promoted to the Bundesliga, the top football league in Germany, from the 2. Bundesliga.[219]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (Vietnamese: [lē ɗɨ̌k tʰɔ̂ˀ] (listen); 14 October 1911 – 13 October 1990), born Phan Đình Khải in Nam Dinh Province, was a Vietnamese revolutionary, general, diplomat, and politician.[1] He was the first Asian to be awarded the Nobel Peace Prize (jointly with United States Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, in 1973), but refused the award.
<h2>Communist revolutionary</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder became active in Vietnamese nationalism as a teenager and spent much of his adolescence in French prisons, an experience that hardened him. Tho's nickname was "the Hammer" on the account of his severity.[2] In 1930, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder helped found the Indochinese Communist Party. French colonial authorities imprisoned him from 1930 to 1936 and again from 1939 to 1944. The French imprisoned him in one of the "tiger cage" cells on the prison located on the island of Poulo Condore (modern Côn Sơn Island) in the South China Sea. Poulo Condore with its "tiger cage" cells was regarded as the harshest prison in all of French Indochina.[3] During his time in the "tiger cage", Tho suffered from hunger, heat, and humiliation. Together with other Vietnamese Communist prisoners, Tho studied literature, science, foreign languages and acted in Molière plays.[4] Despite being imprisoned by the French, France was still regarded as the "land of culture", and the prisoners paid a "peculiar tribute" to French culture by putting on Molière plays.[5]After his release in 1945, he helped lead the Viet Minh, the Vietnamese independence movement, against the French, until the Geneva Accords were signed in 1954. In 1948, he was in South Vietnam as Deputy Secretary, Head of the Organization Department of Cochinchina Committee Party. He then joined the Lao Dong Politburo of the Vietnam Workers' Party in 1955, now the Communist Party of Vietnam. Thọ oversaw the Communist insurgency that began in 1956 against the South Vietnamese government. In 1963 Thọ supported the purges of the Party surrounding Resolution 9.[6]
<h2>Peace-making, Paris 1968–1973</h2>
The United States actively joined the Vietnam War during the early 1960s. Several rounds of Paris Peace Talks (some public, some secret) were held between 1968 and 1973. Xuân Thuỷ was the official head of the North Vietnamese delegation, but Tho arrived in Paris in June 1968 to take effective control.[2] On his way to Paris, Tho stopped in Moscow to meet the Soviet Premier Aleksei Kosygin. On Tho's behalf, Kosygin sent President Lyndon B. Johnson a letter reading: "My colleagues and I believe and have grounds to believe that an end to the bombing [of North Vietnam] would lead to a breakthrough in the peace talks".[7]On 26 June 1968, Tho first met Cyrus Vance and Philip Habib of the American delegation at a "safe house" in the Paris suburb of Sceaux.[8] On 8 September 1968, Tho first met W. Averell Harriman, the head of the American delegation, in a villa in the town of Vitry-sur-Seine.[9] At the meeting, Harriman conceded that in "serious talks" the National Liberation Front (Viet Cong) might take part in the talks provided that the South Vietnamese were also allowed to join.[10] At another meeting with Harriman on 12 September, Tho made the concession that South Vietnam could continue as an independent state provided the National Liberation Front could join the government, but demanded that the United States had to unconditionally cease bombing all of North Vietnam first.[9] After the meeting, Harriman thanked Tho for his "straight talk", but disputed a number of Tho's claims, saying that the Vietnam war was not the most costly war in American history.[11] Tho was unhappy when Hanoi demanded that the National Liberation Front take part in the peace talks as the lead negotiating team above the North Vietnamese, which he knew would cause complications. He flew back to Hanoi in an attempt to change the instructions, in which he was successful, but was also told to tell Harriman that an expanded four-party talks involving the Americans, the South Vietnamese, the North Vietnamese and the Viet Cong would began "as early as possible" without settling a firm date.[12] However, the four party talks did not take place as planned as South Vietnamese President Nguyễn Văn Thiệu decided to stall talks after receiving messages from Anna Chennault that the Republican candidate Richard Nixon would be more supportive.[13] On 18 January 1969, Tho told Harriman that he regretted his departure, saying: "If you had stopped bombing after two or three months of talks, the situation would have been different now".[14]While Xuân Thuỷ led the official negotiating team representing the Democratic Republic of Vietnam at the talks in Paris, Thọ and U.S. National Security Advisor Henry Kissinger since February 1970 engaged in secret talks that eventually led to a cease-fire in the Paris Peace Accords of 23 January 1973.In February 1969, Kissinger asked the Soviet ambassador in Washington, Anatoly Dobrynin, to set up a meeting with Tho in Paris.[15] On 4 August 1969, Kissinger had a secret meeting at the house of Jean Sainteny, a former French colonial official who served in Vietnam and was sympathetic towards Vietnamese nationalism. However, Tho did not appear as expected and instead Thuỷ represented North Vietnam.[16] Tho first met Kissinger in a secret meeting in a modest house in Paris on the night of 21 February 1970, marking the beginning of a test of wills that was to last three years. Kissinger was later to say of Tho: "I don't look back on our meetings with any great joy, yet he was a person of substance and discipline who defended the position he represented with dedication".[5] Tho told Kissinger at their first meeting that "Vietnamization" was doomed, dismissively saying in French: "Previously, with over one million U.S and Saigon troops, you have failed. Now how can you win if you let the South Vietnamese Army fight alone and if you only give them military support?".[17] Kissinger took the fact that Tho began his activism working for Vietnamese independence at the age of 16 as a proof that he was a "fanatic", portraying Tho to Nixon as an unreasonable, uncompromising man, but one was also a well mannered, cultured and polite. Kissinger found Tho's air of superiority exasperating as Tho took the viewpoint that North Vietnam was the real Vietnam, and regarded the Americans as "barbarians" who were merely trying to delay the inevitable by supporting South Vietnam.[18] In April 1970, Tho broke off his meetings with Kissinger, saying that there was nothing to discuss.[19] An attempt by Kissinger to talk to Tho again in May 1970 was rejected with a note reading "The U.S. words of peace are just empty ones".[20]By May 1971, Tho started to change tactics in the talks, insisting that the main issue now was removing President Thiệu after the Americans departed.[21] In July 1971, Kissinger taunted Tho with the news that President Nixon would be visiting China soon to meet Mao Zedong, telling him that the days when the North Vietnamese could count of the supply of Chinese arms were coming to close. Tho showed no emotion, saying: "That is your affair. Our fighting is our preoccupation, and that will decide the outcome for our country. What you have told us will have no influence on our fighting".[22] In March 1972, the North Vietnamese launched the Easter Offensive that was initially successful, and led to warnings that the United States would start bombing North Vietnam again.[23] Tho sent a message saying if the bombing was resumed, it would be "a very serious step of escalation, aimed at stopping the collapse of the situation in South Vietnam and putting pressure on us".[24] On 2 May 1972, Tho had his 13th meeting with Kissinger in Paris. The meeting was hostile as the North Vietnamese had just taken Quang Tri City in South Vietnam, which led Nixon to tell Kissinger "No nonsense. No niceness. No accommodations". During the meeting, Tho mentioned that Senator William Fulbright was criticizing the Nixon administration, leading Kissinger to say: "Our domestic discussions are no concern of yours". Tho snapped back: "I'm giving an example to prove that Americans share our views".[25] When Kissinger asked Tho why North Vietnam had not responded on a proposal he sent via the Soviet Union, Tho replied: "We have on many occasions said that if you have any question, you should talk to directly to us, and we shall talk directly to you. We don't speak through a third person".[26]Tho next met Kissinger on 19 July 1972.[27] Kissinger asked: "If the United States can accept governments in large that are not pro-American, why should it insist on a pro-U.S government in Saigon?"[28] Tho stated that Kissinger were not offering anything new. By August 1972, Kissinger was promising Tho that he would pressure Thieu to resign if only Tho would agree to make a peace deal before the presidential elections of that year. Tho told Kissinger that the timetable for Thieu's departure was no longer an immediate concern, and instead he wanted some $8 billion in reparations for the war damage. Kissinger also told Tho that he wanted to tell the world about their secret meetings since 1970 in order to give the impression that Nixon was making progress on peace in Vietnam, a suggestion that Tho rejected, saying it was not his job to assist Nixon's reelection campaign.[29] On 15 September 1972, Kissinger told Tho: "We wish to end before October 15-if sooner, all the better".[30] Tho told Hanoi that Kissinger wanted a peace agreement before the election and now was the best time to settle.[31]On 7 October 1972, Kissinger and Tho agreed to a government of national reconciliation in Saigon that was to include the National Liberation Front. Kissinger told Tho that he expected a peace agreement to be signed in Paris on 25 or 26 October 1972, saying that all was needed now as the approval of Thieu and Nixon.[32] However, when Kissinger arrived in Saigon, Thieu refused to sign the peace agreement.[33] Nixon had initially agreed to the peace agreement, but upon hearing of Thieu's claims of betrayal started to change his mind.[34] On 20 November 1972, Kissinger met Tho again in Paris. Kissinger no longer aimed at secrecy and was followed by paparazzi as he went to a house owned by the French Communist Party where Tho was waiting for him. Kissinger announced that the Americans wanted major changes to the peace agreement made in October to accommodate Thieu, which led Tho to accuse him of negotiating in bad faith. Tho stated: "We have been deceived by the French, the Japanese and the Americans. But the deception has never been so flagrant as of now". Kissinger insisted the changes he wanted were only minor, but in effect he wanted to renegotiate almost the entire agreement. Tho rejected Kissinger's terms, saying he would abide by the terms agreed to on 8 October.[35] Putting more pressure, Nixon told Kissinger to break off the talks if Tho would not agree to the changes he wanted. Kissinger told Nixon: "While we have a moral case for bombing North Vietnam when it does not accept our terms, it seems to be really stretching the point to bomb North Vietnam when it has accepted our terms and when South Vietnam has not". By December 1972, the talks had broken, and Nixon decided to resume bombing North Vietnam.[36] On 17 December 1972, the Christmas bombings began.[37] On 26 December 1972, North Vietnam announced a willingness to resume peace talks in Paris again in January. Though Nixon had decided after all to accept the peace terms of 8 October, the bombings allowed him to portray himself as having forced North Vietnam to the table. The American historian A.J. Langguth wrote the Christmas bombings were "pointless" as the final peace agreement of 23 January 1973 was essentially the same as that of 8 October 1972 as Tho refused to make any substantial concessions.[38]The relationship between Kissinger and Tho was antagonistic with Tho taking the airs of a Vietnamese mandarin lecturing a dim-witted student, which especially enraged the Harvard professor Kissinger. After one meeting, Kissinger asked "Allow me to ask you one question: do you scold your colleagues in the Central Committee the way you scold us?" After the Christmas bombings of 1972, Tho was in particularly savage mood to Kissinger. At their meeting on 8 January 1973 in a house in the French town of Gif-sur-Yvette, Kissinger arrived to find nobody at the door to greet him. When Kissinger entered the conference room, nobody spoke to him. Sensing the hostile mood, Kissinger speaking in French said: "It was not my fault about the bombing". Before Kissinger could say anymore, Tho exploded in rage, saying in French: "Under the pretext of interrupted negotiations, you resumed the bombing of North Vietnam, just at the moment when I reached home. You have 'greeted' my arrival in a very courteous manner! You action, I can say, is flagrant and gross! You and no one else strained the honor of the United States". Tho shouted at Kissinger for over an hour, and despite Kissinger's requests not to speak so loudly because the reporters outside the room could hear what he was saying, he did not relent. Tho concluded: "For more than ten years, America has used violence to beat down the Vietnamese people-napalm, B-52s. But you don't draw any lessons from your failures. You continue the same policy. Ngu xuan! Ngu xuan! Ngu xuan!" When Kissinger asked what ngu xuan meant in Vietnamese, the translator refused to translate, as ngu xuan roughly means that a person is grossly stupid.[39]When Kissinger was finally able to speak, he argued that it was Tho who by being unreasonable had forced Nixon to order the Christmas bombings, a claim that led Tho to snap in fury: "You've spent billions of dollars and many tons of bombs when we had a text ready to sign".[40] Kissigner replied: "I have heard many adjectives in your comments. I propose that you should not use them". Tho answered: "I have used those adjectives with a great deal of restraint already. The world opinion, the U.S. press and U.S. political personalities have used harsher words".[41]When the talks finally began, Kissinger put forward the demand that North Vietnam pull out all of its troops outs of South Vietnam, a demand that Tho rejected out of hand. Tho stated the only issues remaining were the demilitarized zone (DMZ), which he wanted to see abolished under the grounds that all of Vietnam was one country while Kissinger insisted that only civilians be allowed to cross the DMZ that divided the two Vietnams. After much argument, Kissinger agreed to take the issue of the DMZ out of the peace agreement and inserted the phrase "among the questions to be negotiated there is the question of the modalities for civilian movement across the provisional military demarcation line". A paragraph was inserted calling for the withdraw of all foreign forces from South Vietnam, which Kissinger claimed was a commitment from Tho to pull out North Vietnamese forces, an interpretation he did not share as he argued that the North Vietnamese troops were not foreign. Tho told Kissinger that if a peace agreement was signed, that within 15 days a peace agreement would be signed for Laos, but he stated unlike the Pathet Lao in Laos, North Vietnam had no influence or control over the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia. Kissinger did not believe Tho's claims that the Khmer Rouge leader Pol Pot was a fanatical Khmer nationalist with a ferocious hatred of the Vietnamese, the ancient arch-enemies of the Khmer. After the meeting, Kissinger told Tho: "We must forget all that has happened. When we walk out, we must be smiling".[41]On the night of 9 January 1973, Kissinger phoned Nixon in Washington to say that a peace agreement would be signed very soon.[41] On 10 January 1973, the negotiations broke down when Kissinger demanded the release of all American POWs in North Vietnam once a peace agreement was signed, but offered no guarantees about Viet Cong prisoners being held in South Vietnam. Tho stated: "I cannot accept your proposal. I completely reject it".[42] Tho wanted the release of all prisoners once a peace agreement was signed, which led Kissinger to say this was an unreasonable demand.[43] Tho who had been tortured as an young man by the French colonial police for advocating Vietnamese independence shouted: "You have never been a prisoner. You don't understand suffering. It's unfair". Kissinger finally offered the concession that the United States would use "maximum influence" to pressure the South Vietnamese government to release all Viet Cong prisoners within sixty days of a peace agreement being signed.[42] On 23 January 1973 at 12:45 pm Kissinger and Tho signed the peace agreement.[43]The basic facts of the Accords included: release of POWs within 80 days; ceasefire to be monitored by the International Commission of Control and Supervision (ICC); free and democratic elections to be held in South Vietnam; U.S. aid to South Vietnam would continue; and North Vietnamese troops could remain in South Vietnam. On 28 March 1973, the last of the American forces left South Vietnam.[43] While 23 January is generally recognized as the enactment date of the Peace Accords, the talks continued out of necessity. Sporadic fighting continued in some regions. While U.S. ground forces were removed by 29 March, bombing continued in North Vietnam. Due to continued allegations of ceasefire violations by all sides, Kissinger and Thọ met in Paris in May and June 1973 for the purpose of getting the implementation of the peace agreement back on track. On 13 June 1973, the United States and North Vietnam signed a joint communique pledging mutual support for full implementation of the Paris Accords.
<h2>Nobel Peace Prize</h2>
Thọ and Henry Kissinger were jointly awarded the 1973 Nobel Peace Prize for their efforts in negotiating the Paris Peace Accords.[44] However, Thọ declined to accept the award, claiming that peace had not yet been established, and that the United States and the South Vietnamese governments were in violation of the Paris Peace Accords:The ceasefire would not last, with the war ending when Saigon fell in 1975 and North Vietnam captured South Vietnam.
<h2>Ending the war</h2>
In January 1974, Tho told General Hoàng Văn Thái he could not leave to take up a command in South Vietnam as he had expected, saying that the Politburo had assigned him another, more important task. General Thai who was hoping to win glory on the battlefield begged Tho to let him go, but he was unyielding, saying that turning the Ho Chi Minh Trail into a highway was more important. General Thai sent to work, using bulldozers from the Soviet Union and China that over the course of 1974 transformed the Ho Chi Minh Trail into a paved, four lane highway that ran the 1,200 km from North Vietnam through Laos and Cambodia into South Vietnam while also laying down a 3, 000 mile pipeline to carry oil.[46] The paving of the Ho Chi Minh Trail allowed North Vietnam to not only send more troops to South Vietnam, but to keep them well supplied.In December 1974, the North Vietnamese launched an offensive in the Central Highlands of South Vietnam that proved more successful than expected and on 6 January 1975 took the provincial capital of Phuoc Long. Le Duan, the secretary-general of the Vietnamese Workers' Party, decided to follow up this victory with an offensive to seize all of the Central Highlands and sent Tho down to monitor operations.[47] Following the Communist victory at the Battle of Ban Me Thuot which ended on 11 March 1975, Tho approved the plans of the North Vietnamese commander, General Van Tien Dung, to take Pleiku and push further south. Tho also reported to Hanoi that the South Vietnamese Army were suffering from low morale and fighting poorly, which led him to suggest that all of South Vietnam might be taken that year, instead of 1976 as originally planned. The name of the campaign to take Saigon would be the Ho Chi Minh campaign.[48] The principle problem for the North Vietnamese was that operations had to be completed before the monsoons arrived in June, giving them a very short period of two months to win the war in 1975.[49] Tho sent Le Duan a poem that began "You warned: Go out and come back in victory...The time of opportunity has arrived". By April 1975, the North Vietnamese had advanced within striking distance of Saigon with what would prove to be the last major battle of the Vietnam war taking place at Phan Rang between 13 and 16 April 1975.[50]On 22 April 1975, General Dung showed Tho his plan to take Saigon, which he approved, saying as he signed off on Dung's plan that this was the death sentence for the regime of "reactionary traitors" in Saigon.[51] On 30 April 1975, the North Vietnamese took Saigon and Tho entered the city in triumph. A man committed to hard work, he immediately set about giving orders to ensure that the water works and electricity grid of Saigon was still functioning; that food would continue to arrive from the countryside; to make arrangements to deal with the one million soldiers of the South Vietnamese Army that he ordered dissolved; and appointing administrators to replace the South Vietnamese officials. On behalf of the Politburo he gave General Dung a telegram from Hanoi that simply read: "Political Bureau is most happy". On 1 May 1975, a parade was held in Saigon to celebrate both May Day and the victory with Tho watching the victorious soldiers march down the streets of Saigon, which was soon renamed Ho Chi Minh City.[52]
<h2>Later life</h2>
From 1978 to 1982 firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was named by Hanoi to act as chief advisor to the Kampuchean United Front for National Salvation (FUNSK) and later to the nascent People's Republic of Kampuchea. firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's mission was to ensure that Khmer nationalism would not override Vietnam's interests in Cambodia after the Khmer Rouge was overthrown.[53]firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was the Standing Member of the Central Committee's Secretariat of the Party from 1982 to 1986 and later became the Advisor of Party's Central Committee.
<h2>Death</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder died on 13 October 1990, the evening before his 79th birthday, having reportedly suffered from cancer, in Hanoi.[54]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (佐藤 榮作, secondnameplaceholder firstnameplaceholder, 27 March 1901 – 3 June 1975) was a Japanese politician who served as Prime Minister of Japan from 1964 to 1972. He is the third-longest serving Prime Minister, and ranks second in longest uninterrupted service as Prime Minister.secondnameplaceholder entered the National Diet in 1949 as a member of the Liberal Party. Gradually rising through the ranks of Japanese politics, he held a series of cabinet positions. In 1964 he succeeded Hayato Ikeda as Prime Minister of Japan, becoming the first Prime Minister to have been born in the 20th century.As Prime Minister, secondnameplaceholder presided over a period of rapid economic growth. He arranged for the formal return of Okinawa (occupied by the United States since the end of the Second World War) to Japanese control. secondnameplaceholder brought Japan into the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, for which he received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1974.
<h2>Early life</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born in Tabuse, Yamaguchi Prefecture, on 27 March 1901 and studied German law at Tokyo Imperial University. In 1923, he passed the senior civil service examinations, and in the following year, upon graduation, became a civil servant in the Ministry of Railways. He served as Director of the Osaka Railways Bureau from 1944 to 1946 and Vice-Minister for Transportation from 1947 to 1948.[1]secondnameplaceholder entered the Diet in 1949 as a member of the Liberal Party.He served as Minister of Postal Services and Telecommunications from July 1951 to July 1952. Sato gradually rose through the ranks of Japanese politics, becoming chief cabinet secretary to then prime minister Shigeru Yoshida from January 1953 to July 1954. He later served as minister of construction from October 1952 to February 1953.After the Liberal Party merged with the Japan Democratic Party to form the Liberal Democratic Party, secondnameplaceholder served as chairman of the party executive council from December 1957 to June 1958. secondnameplaceholder became minister of finance in the cabinets of Nobusuke Kishi (his brother) and Hayato Ikeda.From July 1961 to July 1962, secondnameplaceholder was Minister of International Trade and Industry. From July 1963 to June 1964 he was concurrently head of the Hokkaidō Development Agency and of the Science and Technology Agency.
<h2>Prime minister</h2>
secondnameplaceholder succeeded Ikeda after the latter resigned due to ill health. His government was longer than many, and by the late 1960s he appeared to have single-handed control over the entire Japanese government. He was a popular prime minister due to the growing economy; his foreign policy, which was a balancing act between the interests of the United States and China, was more tenuous. Student political radicalization led to numerous protests against secondnameplaceholder's support of the United States–Japan Security Treaty, and Japanese tacit support for American military operations in Vietnam. These protests expanded into massive riots, which eventually forced secondnameplaceholder to close the prestigious University of Tokyo for a year in 1969.[2]After three terms as prime minister, secondnameplaceholder decided not to run for a fourth. His heir apparent, Takeo Fukuda, won the Sato faction's support in the subsequent Diet elections, but the more popular MITI minister, Kakuei Tanaka, won the vote, ending the secondnameplaceholder faction's dominance.secondnameplaceholder is the last Prime minister of Japan to visit Taiwan during his term. In 1965, secondnameplaceholder approved a US$150 million loan to Taiwan. He visited Taipei in September 1967. In 1969, secondnameplaceholder insisted that the defense of Taiwan was necessary for the safety of Japan. secondnameplaceholder followed the United States in most major issues, but secondnameplaceholder opposed the Nixon visit to China.[3] secondnameplaceholder also bitterly opposed the entry of the PRC into the United Nations in 1971.In the 1960s Sato argued that Japan needed nuclear weapons to match those of China, but the United States opposed such.  The Johnson administration pressed Japan to sign the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, ending, for then, Japan's nuclear ambitions.[4]secondnameplaceholder introduced the Three Non-Nuclear Principles on 11 December 1967, which means non-production, non-possession, and non-introduction of nuclear weapons. He later suggested the "Four-Pillars Nuclear Policy".[clarification needed] During the prime ministership of secondnameplaceholder, Japan entered the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. The Diet passed a resolution formally adopting the principles in 1971. For this he received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1974.However, recent inquiries show that behind the scenes, secondnameplaceholder was more accommodating towards US plans of stationing nuclear weapons on Japanese soil. In December 2008, the Japanese government declassified a document showing that during a visit to the US in January 1965, he was discussing with US officials the possibility of using nuclear weapons against the People's Republic of China.[5] In December 2009, his son reported that his father agreed in a November 1969 conversation with US President Nixon to allow the stationing of nuclear warheads in Okinawa once it was restored to Japanese sovereignty.[6]Since the end of the Second World War, Okinawa had been occupied by the United States. While visiting the United States in January 1965, secondnameplaceholder openly asked President Lyndon Johnson to return Okinawa to Japan. In August 1965, secondnameplaceholder became the first post-war prime minister of Japan to visit Okinawa.In 1969, secondnameplaceholder struck a deal with U.S. president Richard Nixon to repatriate Okinawa and remove its nuclear weaponry: this deal was controversial because it allowed the U.S. forces in Japan to maintain bases in Okinawa after repatriation.[7] Okinawa was formally returned to Japan on 15 May 1972, which also included the Senkaku Islands (also known as the Diaoyu Islands in China and the subject, since 1971, of a Sino-Japanese sovereignty dispute; see Senkaku Islands dispute).During secondnameplaceholder's term, Japan participated in the creation of the Asian Development Bank in 1966 and held a ministerial level conference on Southeast Asian economic development.[8] It was the first international conference sponsored by the Japanese government in the postwar period. In 1967, he was also the first Japanese prime minister to visit Singapore. He was largely supportive of the South Vietnamese government throughout the Vietnam War.
<h2>Later life</h2>
secondnameplaceholder shared the Nobel Peace Prize with Seán MacBride in 1974. He was awarded for representing the Japanese people's will for peace, and for signing the nuclear arms Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1970.[9] He was the first Asian to accept the Nobel Peace Prize. (In 1973, Vietnamese politician Le Duc Tho had become the first Asian to win the prize, but Tho had rejected it.[10])
<h2>Death</h2>
While at a restaurant on 19 May 1975, secondnameplaceholder suffered a massive stroke, resulting in a coma. He died at 12:55 a.m. on 3 June at the Jikei University Medical Center, aged 74. After a public funeral, his ashes were buried in the family cemetery at Tabuse.secondnameplaceholder was posthumously honored with the Collar of the Order of the Chrysanthemum, the highest honor in the Japanese honors system.
<h2>Honours</h2>
secondnameplaceholder received the following awards:
<h2>Personal life</h2>
secondnameplaceholder married Hiroko Matsuoka (5 January 1907 – 16 April 1987) the niece of diplomat Yōsuke Matsuoka, in 1926 and had two sons, Ryūtarō and Shinji. In a 1969 Shukan Asahi interview with novelist Shūsaku Endō, his wife accused him of being a rake and a wife-beater.[15] His hobbies included golf, fishing, and the Japanese tea ceremony.[1] Nobusuke Kishi (his older brother) and Shinzō Abe (his grandnephew) were both former prime ministers.[16] Both prime minister secondnameplaceholder and his wife, Hiroko Matsuoka, are descendants of samurai.[citation needed]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (26 January 1904 – 15 January 1988) was an Irish Clann na Poblachta politician who served as Minister for External Affairs from 1948 to 1951, Leader of Clann na Poblachta from 1946 to 1965 and Chief of Staff of the IRA from 1936 to 1937. He served as a Teachta Dála (TD) from 1947 to 1957.[1]Rising from a domestic Irish political career, he founded or participated in many international organisations of the 20th century, including the United Nations, the Council of Europe and Amnesty International. He received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1974, the Lenin Peace Prize for 1975–1976 and the UNESCO Silver Medal for Service in 1980.
<h2>Early years</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born in Paris in 1904, the son of Major John secondnameplaceholder[2] and Maud Gonne. His first language was French, and he retained a French accent in the English language for the rest of his life.[3] He first studied at the Lycée Saint-Louis-de-Gonzague. He remained in Paris until his father's execution after the Easter Rising of 1916, when he was sent to school at Mount St Benedict's, Gorey, County Wexford in Ireland. In 1919, aged 15, he joined the Irish Volunteers, which fought as part of the Irish Republican Army, and took part in the Irish War of Independence. He opposed the 1921 Anglo-Irish Treaty and was imprisoned by the Irish Free State during the Civil War.[4]On his release in 1924, secondnameplaceholder studied law at University College Dublin and resumed his IRA activities.[5] He worked briefly for Éamon de Valera as his personal secretary, travelling with him to Rome to meet various dignitaries.In January 1925, on his twenty-first birthday, secondnameplaceholder married Catalina "Kid" Bulfin, a woman four years his senior who shared his political views.[6] Bulfin was the daughter of the Irish nationalist publisher and travel-writer William Bulfin.Before returning to Dublin in 1927, where he became the IRA's Director of Intelligence, secondnameplaceholder worked as a journalist in Paris and London. Soon after his return, he was arrested and charged with the murder of politician Kevin O'Higgins, who had been assassinated near his home in Booterstown, County Dublin. secondnameplaceholder was able to prove, however, that he was on his way back to Ireland at the time, as he was able to call unionist-turned-Cumann na nGaedheal politician Bryan Cooper, whom he had met on the boat travelling home, as a witness. He was then charged with being a subversive and interned in Mountjoy Prison.[7]Towards the end of the 1920s, after many supporters had left to join Fianna Fáil, some members of the IRA started pushing for a more left-wing agenda. After the IRA Army Council voted down the idea, secondnameplaceholder launched a new movement, Saor Éire ("Free Ireland"), in 1931. Although it was a non-military organisation, Saor Éire was declared unlawful along with the IRA, Cumann na mBan and nine other bodies. secondnameplaceholder, meanwhile, became the security services' number-one target.[8]In 1936, the IRA's chief of staff Moss Twomey was sent to prison for three years; he was replaced by secondnameplaceholder. At the time, the movement was in a state of disarray, with conflicts between several factions and personalities. Tom Barry was appointed chief of staff to head up a military operation against the British, an action with which secondnameplaceholder did not agree.[9]In 1937, secondnameplaceholder was called to the bar. He then resigned from the IRA when the Constitution of Ireland was enacted later that year. As a barrister, secondnameplaceholder frequently defended IRA prisoners of the state, but was unsuccessful in stopping the execution in 1944 of Charlie Kerins, convicted of killing Garda Detective Denis O'Brien in 1942. In 1946, during the inquest into the death of firstnameplaceholder McCaughey, secondnameplaceholder embarrassed the authorities by forcing them to admit that the conditions in Portlaoise Prison were inhumane.[10]
<h2>Clann na Poblachta</h2>
In 1946, secondnameplaceholder founded the republican/socialist party Clann na Poblachta. He hoped it would replace Fianna Fáil as Ireland's major political party. In October 1947, he won a seat in Dáil Éireann at a by-election in the Dublin County constituency.[11] On the same day, Patrick Kinane also won the Tipperary by-election for Clann na Poblachta.[12]However, at the 1948 general election Clann na Poblachta won only ten seats. The party joined with Fine Gael, the Labour Party, the National Labour Party, Clann na Talmhan and several independents to form the First Inter-Party Government with Fine Gael TD John A. Costello as Taoiseach. Richard Mulcahy was the Leader of Fine Gael, but secondnameplaceholder and many other Irish Republicans had never forgiven Mulcahy for his role in carrying out 77 executions under the government of the Irish Free State in the 1920s during the Irish Civil War. To gain the support of Clann na Poblachta, Mulcahy stepped aside in favour of Costello. Two Clann na Poblachta TDs joined the cabinet; secondnameplaceholder became Minister for External Affairs[2] while Noël Browne became Minister for Health.On his ministerial accession, secondnameplaceholder sent a telegram to Pope Pius XII offering:At secondnameplaceholder's suggestion, Costello nominated the northern protestant Denis Ireland to the Seanad Eireann,[14] the first resident of Northern Ireland to be appointed as a member of the Oireachtas. While a Senator (1948–1951), Ireland was Irish representative to the Council of Europe assisting secondnameplaceholder in the leading role he was to play in securing acceptance of the European Convention on Human Rights--signed in Rome on 4 November 1950.[15] In 1950, secondnameplaceholder was president of the Council of Foreign Ministers of the Council of Europe, and he was vice-president of the Organisation for European Economic Co-operation (OEEC, later OECD) in 1948–51. He was responsible for Ireland not joining the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO).[16]He was instrumental in the repeal of the External Relations Act and the passing of the Republic of Ireland Act which came into force in 1949. It declared that Ireland may officially be described as the Republic of Ireland and that the President of Ireland had the executive authority of the state in its external relations.In 1951, secondnameplaceholder controversially ordered Noël Browne to resign as a minister over the Mother and Child Scheme after it was attacked by the Irish Catholic hierarchy and the Irish medical establishment.[17] Whatever the merits of the scheme, or of Browne, secondnameplaceholder concluded in a Cabinet memorandum:Also in 1951, Clann na Poblachta was reduced to two seats after the general election. secondnameplaceholder kept his seat and was re-elected again in 1954. Opposing the internment of IRA suspects during the Border Campaign (1956–62), he contested both the 1957 and 1961 general elections but failed to be elected both times. He then retired from politics and continued practising as a barrister. He expressed an interest in running as an independent candidate for the 1983 Irish presidential election, but he did not receive sufficient backing and ultimately did not contest.
<h2>International politics</h2>
In 1929 an Irish section of the League Against Imperialism was formed and secondnameplaceholder served as its secretary.[19]secondnameplaceholder served as the International Chairman of Amnesty International from 1961 til 1975. He was Secretary-General of the International Commission of Jurists from 1963 to 1971. Following this, he was also elected Chair (1968–1974) and later President (1974–1985) of the International Peace Bureau in Geneva. He was Vice-President of the Organisation for European Economic Co-operation from 1948–51 and President of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe in 1950. He was also involved in the International Prisoners of Conscience Fund and was appointed the International Commission for the Study of Communication Problems in 1977.[20][21]He drafted the constitution of the Organisation of African Unity (OAU); and also the first constitution of Ghana (the first UK African colony to achieve independence) which lasted for nine years until the coup of 1966.In 1966, the US government reported that he had been involved with a Central Intelligence Agency funding operation.[22]secondnameplaceholder was a signatory of the Convention for European Economic Co-operation, the Convention for the Protection of War Victims (1949) and the European Convention on Human Rights. He also played a part in drawing up the constitutions of Ghana, Zambia and Tanzania.[23]Some of secondnameplaceholder's appointments to the United Nations System included:
<h2>Human rights</h2>
Throughout the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s, secondnameplaceholder worked for human rights worldwide. He took an Irish case to the European Court of Human Rights after hundreds of suspected IRA members were interned without trial in the Republic of Ireland in 1958. He was among a group of lawyers who founded JUSTICE—the UK-based human rights and law reform organisation—initially to monitor the show trials after the 1956 Budapest uprising, but which later became the UK section of the International Commission of Jurists. He was active in a number of international organisations concerned with human rights, among them the Prisoners of Conscience Appeal Fund (trustee).In 1973, he was elected by the General Assembly to the post of High Commissioner for Namibia, with the rank of Assistant Secretary-General. The actions of his father John secondnameplaceholder in leading the Irish Transvaal Brigade (known as secondnameplaceholder's Brigade) for the Boers against the British Army, in the Boer War, gave firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder a unique access to South Africa's apartheid government. In 1977, he was appointed president of the International Commission for the Study of Communication Problems, set up by UNESCO. In 1980 he was appointed Chairman of UNESCO. secondnameplaceholder supported the Dunnes Stores Strike and attended at least one of their gatherings in May 1985.[23]secondnameplaceholder's work was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize (1974)[24] as a man who "mobilised the conscience of the world in the fight against injustice". He later received the Lenin Peace Prize (1975–76) and the UNESCO Silver Medal for Service (1980). He received the Lenin Peace Prize for his opposition to what secondnameplaceholder referred to as "this absolutely obscene arms race." He was one of only two to win both the Lenin and Nobel peace prizes, the other being Linus Pauling.[25]During the 1980s, he initiated the Appeal by Lawyers against Nuclear War[26] which was jointly sponsored by the International Peace Bureau and the International Progress Organization. In close co-operation with Francis Boyle and Hans Köchler of the International Progress Organization he lobbied the General Assembly for a resolution demanding an Advisory Opinion from the International Court of Justice on the legality of nuclear arms. The Advisory Opinion on the Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons was eventually handed down by the ICJ in 1996.In 1982, secondnameplaceholder was chairman of the International Commission to enquire into reported violations of International Law by Israel during its invasion of the Lebanon. The other members were Richard Falk, Kader Asmal, Brian Bercusson, Géraud de la Pradelle, and Stefan Wild. The commission's report, which concluded that "the government of Israel has committed acts of aggression contrary to international law", was published in 1983 under the title Israel in Lebanon.[27]He proposed a plan in 1984, known as the secondnameplaceholder Principles, which he argued would eliminate discrimination against Roman Catholics by employers in Northern Ireland and received widespread support for it in the United States and from Sinn Féin. However the secondnameplaceholder Principles were criticised by the Irish and British Governments and most Northern Ireland parties, including the nationalist Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP), as unworkable and counterproductive.He was also a keen pan-Celticist.
<h2>Later life and death</h2>
In his later years, secondnameplaceholder lived in his mother's home, Roebuck House, that served as a meeting place for many years for Irish nationalists, as well as in the Parisian arrondissement where he grew up with his mother, and enjoyed strolling along boyhood paths. While strolling through the Centre Pompidou Museum in 1979, and happening upon an exhibit for Amnesty International, he whispered to a colleague "Amnesty, you know, was one of my children."[citation needed]In 1978, he received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement.[28]firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder died in Dublin on 15 January 1988, eleven days before his 84th birthday. He is buried in Glasnevin Cemetery in a grave with his mother, and wife who died in 1976.On the occasion of secondnameplaceholder's death the African National Congress (ANC), Oliver Tambo stated "firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder will always be remembered for the concrete leadership he provided to the liberation movement and people of Namibia and South Africa. Driven by his own personal and political insight arising out of the cause of national freedom in Ireland . . . our debt to him can never be repaid."[23]
<h2>Legacy</h2>
Streets in Windhoek, Namibia and Amsterdam are named after him.[23] The HQ of Amnesty International Ireland is called 'Sean secondnameplaceholder House' in his honour.[29] and the International Peace Bureau likewise named the 'firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Prize' in his name.[30]A bust of McBride was unveiled in Iveagh House, headquarters of the Irish Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade in 1995.[31]A novel, The Casting of Mr O'Shaughnessy, was published in 1995 (revised edition 2002) by  Éamon Delaney in which the eponymous Mr O'Shaughnessy was, in the author's own words "partly, but quite obviously, based on the career of the colourful firstnameplaceholder  McBride".[32]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder Dmitrievich secondnameplaceholder (Russian: Андре́й Дми́триевич Са́харов, IPA: [ɐnˈdrʲej dmʲiˈtrʲɪjevʲɪtɕ ˈsaxərəf]; 21 May 1921 – 14 December 1989) was a Soviet and Russian nuclear physicist, dissident, Nobel laureate, and activist for disarmament, peace and human rights.[1]He became renowned as the designer of the Soviet Union's RDS-37, a codename for Soviet development of thermonuclear weapons. secondnameplaceholder later became an advocate of civil liberties and civil reforms in the Soviet Union, for which he faced state persecution; these efforts earned him the Nobel Peace Prize in 1975. The secondnameplaceholder Prize, which is awarded annually by the European Parliament for people and organizations dedicated to human rights and freedoms, is named in his honor.[2]
<h2>Biography</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born in Moscow on May 21, 1921. His father was Dmitri Ivanovich secondnameplaceholder, a physics professor and an amateur pianist.[3] His father taught at the Second Moscow State University.[4] firstnameplaceholder's grandfather Ivan had been a prominent lawyer in the Russian Empire who had displayed respect for social awareness and humanitarian principles (including advocating the abolition of capital punishment) that would later influence his grandson. secondnameplaceholder's mother was Yekaterina Alekseevna Sofiano, a daughter of the army general Aleksey Semenovich Sofiano.[5][6] secondnameplaceholder's parents and paternal grandmother, Maria Petrovna, largely shaped his personality. His mother and grandmother were churchgoers; his father was a nonbeliever. When firstnameplaceholder was about thirteen, he realized that he did not believe. However, despite being an atheist,[7] he did believe in a "guiding principle" that transcends the physical laws.[8]secondnameplaceholder entered Physics Department of Moscow State University in 1938. Following evacuation in 1941 during the Great Patriotic War (World War II), he graduated in Aşgabat, in today's Turkmenistan.[9] He was then assigned to laboratory work in Ulyanovsk. In 1943, he married Klavdia Alekseyevna Vikhireva, with whom he raised two daughters and a son. Klavdia would later die in 1969. He returned to Moscow in 1945 to study at the Theoretical Department of FIAN (the Physical Institute of the Soviet Academy of Sciences). He received his Ph.D. in 1947.[10]After World War II, he researched cosmic rays. In mid-1948 he participated in the Soviet atomic bomb project under Igor Kurchatov and Igor Tamm. secondnameplaceholder's study group at FIAN in 1948 came up with a second concept in August–September 1948.[11] Adding a shell of natural, unenriched uranium around the deuterium would increase the deuterium concentration at the uranium-deuterium boundary and the overall yield of the device, because the natural uranium would capture neutrons and itself fission as part of the thermonuclear reaction. This idea of a layered fission-fusion-fission bomb led secondnameplaceholder to call it the sloika, or layered cake.[11] The first Soviet atomic device was tested on August 29, 1949. After moving to Sarov in 1950, secondnameplaceholder played a key role in the development of the first megaton-range Soviet hydrogen bomb using a design known as secondnameplaceholder's Third Idea in Russia and the Teller–Ulam design in the United States. Before his Third Idea, secondnameplaceholder tried a "layer cake" of alternating layers of fission and fusion fuel. The results were disappointing, yielding no more than a typical fission bomb. However the design was seen to be worth pursuing because deuterium is abundant and uranium is scarce, and he had no idea how powerful the US design was. secondnameplaceholder realised that in order to cause the explosion of one side of the fuel to symmetrically compress the fusion fuel, a mirror could be used to reflect the radiation. The details had not been officially declassified in Russia when secondnameplaceholder was writing his memoirs, but in the Teller–Ulam design, soft X-rays emitted by the fission bomb were focused onto a cylinder of lithium deuteride to compress it symmetrically. This is called radiation implosion. The Teller–Ulam design also had a secondary fission device inside the fusion cylinder to assist with the compression of the fusion fuel and generate neutrons to convert some of the lithium to tritium, producing a mixture of deuterium and tritium.[12][13] secondnameplaceholder's idea was first tested as RDS-37 in 1955. A larger variation of the same design which secondnameplaceholder worked on was the 50 Mt Tsar Bomba of October 1961, which was the most powerful nuclear device ever detonated.secondnameplaceholder saw "striking parallels" between his fate and those of J. Robert Oppenheimer and Edward Teller in the US. secondnameplaceholder believed that in this "tragic confrontation of two outstanding people", both deserved respect, because "each of them was certain he had right on his side and was morally obligated to go to the end in the name of truth." While secondnameplaceholder strongly disagreed with Teller over nuclear testing in the atmosphere and the Strategic Defense Initiative, he believed that American academics had been unfair to Teller's resolve to get the H-bomb for the United States since "all steps by the Americans of a temporary or permanent rejection of developing thermonuclear weapons would have been seen either as a clever feint, or as the manifestation of stupidity. In both cases, the reaction would have been the same – avoid the trap and immediately take advantage of the enemy's stupidity."secondnameplaceholder never felt that by creating nuclear weapons he had "known sin", in Oppenheimer's expression. He later wrote:In 1950 he proposed an idea for a controlled nuclear fusion reactor, the tokamak, which is still the basis for the majority of work in the area. secondnameplaceholder, in association with Tamm, proposed confining extremely hot ionized plasma by torus shaped magnetic fields for controlling thermonuclear fusion that led to the development of the tokamak device.[15]In 1951 he invented and tested the first explosively pumped flux compression generators,[16] compressing magnetic fields by explosives. He called these devices MK (for MagnetoKumulative) generators. The radial MK-1 produced a pulsed magnetic field of 25 megagauss (2500 teslas). The resulting helical MK-2 generated 1000 million amperes in 1953.secondnameplaceholder then tested a MK-driven "plasma cannon" where a small aluminum ring was vaporized by huge eddy currents into a stable, self-confined toroidal plasmoid and was accelerated to 100 km/s.[17] secondnameplaceholder later suggested replacing the copper coil in MK generators with a large superconductor solenoid to magnetically compress and focus underground nuclear explosions into a shaped charge effect. He theorized this could focus 1023 protons per second on a 1 mm2 surface.After 1965 secondnameplaceholder returned to fundamental science and began working on particle physics and physical cosmology.[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]
[27][28][29][30][31][32]He tried to explain the baryon asymmetry of the universe; in that regard, he was the first to give a theoretical motivation for proton decay. Proton decay was suggested by Wigner in 1949 and 
1952.[33]Proton decay experiments had been performed since 1954 already.[34] secondnameplaceholder was the first to consider CPT-symmetric events occurring before the Big Bang:His legacy in this domain are the famous conditions named after him:[20] Baryon number violation, C-symmetry and CP-symmetry violation, and interactions out of thermal equilibrium.secondnameplaceholder was also interested in explaining why the curvature of the universe is so small. This lead him to consider cyclic models, where the universe oscillates between contraction and expansion phases.[30][29] In those models, after a certain number of cycles the curvature naturally becomes infinite even if it had not started this way: secondnameplaceholder considered three starting points, a flat universe with a slightly negative cosmological constant, a universe with a positive curvature and a zero cosmological constant, and a universe with a negative curvature and a slightly negative cosmological constant. Those last two models feature what secondnameplaceholder calls a reversal of the time arrow, which can be summarized as follows: He considers times t > 0 after the initial Big Bang singularity at t = 0 (which he calls "Friedman singularity" and denotes Φ) as well as times t < 0 before that singularity. He then assumes that entropy increases when time increases for t > 0 as well as when time decreases for t < 0, which constitutes his reversal of time. Then he considers the case when the universe at t < 0 is the image of the universe at t > 0 under CPT symmetry but also the case when it is not so: the universe has a non-zero CPT charge at t = 0 in this case. secondnameplaceholder considers a variant of this model where the reversal of the time arrow occurs at a point of maximum entropy instead of happening at the singularity. In those models there is no dynamic interaction between the universe at t < 0 and t > 0.In his first model the two universes did not interact, except via local matter accumulation whose density and pressure become high enough to connect the two sheets through a bridge without spacetime between them, but with a continuity of geodesics beyond the Schwarzschild radius with no singularity[citation needed], allowing an exchange of matter between the two conjugated sheets, based on an idea after Igor Dmitriyevich Novikov.[35] Novikov called such singularities a collapse and an anticollapse, which are an alternative to the couple black hole and white hole in the wormhole model. secondnameplaceholder also proposed the idea of induced gravity as an alternative theory of quantum gravity.[36]Since the late 1950s secondnameplaceholder had become concerned about the moral and political implications of his work. Politically active during the 1960s, secondnameplaceholder was against nuclear proliferation. Pushing for the end of atmospheric tests, he played a role in the 1963 Partial Test Ban Treaty, signed in Moscow.[37]secondnameplaceholder was also involved in an event with political consequences in 1964, when the Soviet Academy of Sciences nominated for full membership Nikolai Nuzhdin, a follower of Trofim Lysenko (initiator of the Stalin-supported anti-genetics campaign Lysenkoism). Contrary to normal practice, secondnameplaceholder, a member of the Academy, publicly spoke out against full membership for Nuzhdin and held him responsible for "the defamation, firing, arrest, even death, of many genuine scientists."[38]:109 In the end, Nuzhdin was not elected, but the episode prompted Sergei Khrushchev to order the KGB to gather compromising material on secondnameplaceholder.[38]:109The major turn in secondnameplaceholder's political evolution came in 1967, when anti-ballistic missile defense became a key issue in US–Soviet relations. In a secret detailed letter to the Soviet leadership of July 21, 1967, secondnameplaceholder explained the need to "take the Americans at their word" and accept their proposal for a "bilateral rejection by the USA and the Soviet Union of the development of antiballistic missile defense" because an arms race in the new technology would otherwise increase the likelihood of nuclear war. He also asked permission to publish his manuscript, which accompanied the letter, in a newspaper to explain the dangers posed by that kind of defense. The government ignored his letter and refused to let him initiate a public discussion of ABMs in the Soviet press.[39][40]In May 1968, secondnameplaceholder completed an essay, "Reflections on Progress, Peaceful Coexistence, and Intellectual Freedom". He described the anti-ballistic missile defense as a major threat of world nuclear war. After the essay was circulated in samizdat and then published outside the Soviet Union,[41] secondnameplaceholder was banned from conducting any military-related research and returned to FIAN to study fundamental theoretical physics.For 12 years, until his exile to Gorky (Nizhny Novgorod) in January 1980, secondnameplaceholder assumed the role of a widely recognized and open dissident in Moscow.[42]:21 He stood vigil outside closed courtrooms, wrote appeals on behalf of more than 200 individual prisoners, and continued to write essays about the need for democratization.[42]:21In 1970, secondnameplaceholder was among the three founding members of the Committee on Human Rights in the USSR, along with Valery Chalidze and firstnameplaceholder Tverdokhlebov.[42]:21 The Committee wrote appeals, collected signatures for petitions and succeeded in affiliating with several international human rights organizations. Its work was the subject of many KGB reports and brought secondnameplaceholder under increasing pressure from the government.[15]secondnameplaceholder married a fellow human rights activist, Yelena Bonner, in 1972.[43]By 1973, secondnameplaceholder was meeting regularly with Western correspondents and holding press conferences in his apartment.[42]:21 He appealed to the US Congress to approve the 1974 Jackson-Vanik Amendment to a trade bill, which coupled trade tariffs to the Kremlin's willingness to allow freer emigration.[42]:24In 1972, secondnameplaceholder became the target of sustained pressure from his fellow scientists in the Soviet Academy of Sciences and the Soviet press. The writer Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn came to his defence.[45]In 1973 and 1974, the Soviet media campaign continued, targeting both secondnameplaceholder and Solzhenitsyn. While secondnameplaceholder disagreed with Solzhenitsyn's vision of Russian revival, he deeply respected him for his courage.secondnameplaceholder later described that it took "years" for him to "understand how much substitution, deceit, and lack of correspondence with reality there was" in the Soviet ideals. "At first I thought, despite everything that I saw with my own eyes, that the Soviet State was a breakthrough into the future, a kind of prototype for all countries". Then he came, in his words, to "the theory of symmetry: all governments and regimes to a first approximation are bad, all peoples are oppressed, and all are threatened by common dangers."[14]After that he realized that there is not muchsecondnameplaceholder's ideas on social development led him to put forward the principle of human rights as a new basis of all politics. In his works, he declared that "the principle 'what is not prohibited is allowed' should be understood literally", and defied what he saw as unwritten ideological rules imposed by the Communist Party on the society in spite of a democratic Soviet Constitution (1936).In no way did secondnameplaceholder consider himself a prophet or the like:In a letter written from exile, he cheered up a fellow physicist and human rights activist with the words: "Fortunately, the future is unpredictable and also – because of quantum effects – uncertain." For secondnameplaceholder, the indeterminacy of the future supported his belief that he could and should take personal responsibility for it.In 1973, secondnameplaceholder was nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize, and in 1974, he was awarded the Prix mondial Cino Del Duca.secondnameplaceholder was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1975. The Norwegian Nobel Committee called him "a spokesman for the conscience of mankind".[2] In the words of the Nobel Committee's citation: "In a convincing manner secondnameplaceholder has emphasised that Man's inviolable rights provide the only safe foundation for genuine and enduring international cooperation."[14]secondnameplaceholder was not allowed to leave the Soviet Union to collect the prize. His wife, Yelena Bonner, read his speech at the ceremony in Oslo, Norway.[46][47] On the day the prize was awarded, secondnameplaceholder was in Vilnius, where the human rights activist Sergei Kovalev was being tried.[48] In his Nobel lecture, "Peace, Progress, Human Rights", secondnameplaceholder called for an end to the arms race, greater respect for the environment, international cooperation, and universal respect for human rights. He included a list of prisoners of conscience and political prisoners in the Soviet Union and stated that he shared the prize with them.[47]By 1976, the head of the KGB, Yuri Andropov, was prepared to call secondnameplaceholder "Domestic Enemy Number One" before a group of KGB officers.[42]:24secondnameplaceholder was arrested on 22 January 1980, following his public protests against the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan in 1979, and was sent to the city of Gorky, now Nizhny Novgorod, a city that was off limits to foreigners.[49]Between 1980 and 1986, secondnameplaceholder was kept under Soviet police surveillance. In his memoirs, he mentioned that their apartment in Gorky was repeatedly subjected to searches and heists. secondnameplaceholder was named the 1980 Humanist of the Year by the American Humanist Association.[50]In May 1984, secondnameplaceholder's wife, Yelena Bonner, was detained, and secondnameplaceholder began a hunger strike, demanding permission for his wife to travel to the United States for heart surgery. He was forcibly hospitalized and force-fed. He was held in isolation for four months. In August 1984, Bonner was sentenced by a court to five years of exile in Gorky.In April 1985, secondnameplaceholder started a new hunger strike for his wife to travel abroad for medical treatment. He again was taken to a hospital and force-fed. In August, the Politburo discussed what to do about secondnameplaceholder.[51] He remained in the hospital until October 1985, when his wife was allowed to travel to the United States. She had heart surgery in the United States and returned to Gorky in June 1986.In December 1985, the European Parliament established the secondnameplaceholder Prize for Freedom of Thought, to be given annually for outstanding contributions to human rights.[52]On 19 December 1986, Mikhail Gorbachev, who had initiated the policies of perestroika and glasnost, called secondnameplaceholder to tell him that he and his wife could return to Moscow.[53]In 1988, secondnameplaceholder was given the International Humanist Award by the International Humanist and Ethical Union.[54] He helped to initiate the first independent legal political organizations and became prominent in the Soviet Union's growing political opposition. In March 1989, secondnameplaceholder was elected to the new parliament, the All-Union Congress of People's Deputies and co-led the democratic opposition, the Inter-Regional Deputies Group. In November the head of the KGB reported to Gorbachev on secondnameplaceholder's encouragement and support for the coal miners' strike in Vorkuta.[55]In December 1988, secondnameplaceholder visited Armenia and Azerbaijan on a fact-finding mission.[56] He concluded, "For Azerbaijan the issue of Karabakh is a matter of ambition, for the Armenians of Karabakh, it is a matter of life and death".[57]Soon after 21:00 on 14 December 1989, secondnameplaceholder went to his study to take a nap before preparing an important speech he was to deliver the next day in the Congress. His wife went to wake him at 23:00 as he had requested but she found secondnameplaceholder dead on the floor. According to the notes of Yakov Rapoport, a senior pathologist present at the autopsy, it is most likely that secondnameplaceholder died of an arrhythmia consequent to dilated cardiomyopathy at the age of 68.[58] He was interred in the Vostryakovskoye Cemetery in Moscow.
<h2>Influence</h2>
The secondnameplaceholder Prize for Freedom of Thought was established in 1988 by the European Parliament in his honour, and is the highest tribute to human rights endeavours awarded by the European Union. It is awarded annually by the parliament to "those who carry the spirit of Soviet dissident firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder"; to "Laureates who, like secondnameplaceholder, dedicate their lives to peaceful struggle for human rights."[59]An firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder prize has also been awarded by the American Physical Society every second year since 2006 "to recognize outstanding leadership and/or achievements of scientists in upholding human rights".The firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Prize For Writer's Civic Courage was established in October 1990.[60]In 2004, with the approval of Yelena Bonner, an annual secondnameplaceholder Prize for journalism was established for reporters and commentators in Russia. Funded by former Soviet dissident Pyotr Vins,[61] now a businessman in the US, the prize is administered by the Glasnost Defence Foundation in Moscow. The prize "for journalism as an act of conscience" has been won over the years by famous journalists such as Anna Politkovskaya and young reporters and editors working far from Russia's media capital, Moscow. The 2015 winner was Yelena Kostyuchenko.[62]The firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Archives and Human Rights Center, established at Brandeis University in 1993, are now housed at Harvard University.[63]
The documents from that archive were published by the Yale University Press in 2005.[64] These documents are available online.[65]
Most of documents of the archive are letters from the head of the KGB to the Central Committee about activities of Soviet dissidents and recommendations about the interpretation in newspapers. The letters cover the period from 1968 to 1991 (Brezhnev stagnation). The documents characterize not only secondnameplaceholder's activity, but that of other dissidents, as well as that of highest-position apparatchiks and the KGB. No Russian equivalent of the KGB archive is available.
<h2>Honours and awards</h2>
In 1980, secondnameplaceholder was stripped of all Soviet awards for "anti-Soviet activities".[71] Later, during glasnost, he declined the return of his awards and, consequently, Mikhail Gorbachev did not sign the necessary decree.[72]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (born 27 January 1944), also known as firstnameplaceholder Corrigan secondnameplaceholder and formerly as Mairéad Corrigan, is a peace activist from Northern Ireland. She co-founded, with Betty Williams and Ciaran McKeown, the Women for Peace, which later became the Community for Peace People, an organization dedicated to encouraging a peaceful resolution of the Troubles in Northern Ireland.[7] secondnameplaceholder and Williams were awarded the 1976 Nobel Peace Prize.[8]In recent years, she has criticised the Israeli government's policy towards Gaza, in particular to the naval blockade. In June 2010, secondnameplaceholder went on board the MV Rachel Corrie as part of a flotilla that unsuccessfully attempted to breach the blockade.
<h2>Early life (1944–1976)</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born into a Roman Catholic community in Belfast, Northern Ireland, the second of eight children – five sisters and two brothers. Her parents were Andrew and Margaret Corrigan.[9][10] She attended St. Vincent's Primary School, a private Catholic school, until the age of 14, at which time her family could no longer pay for her schooling. After working for a time as a babysitter at a Catholic community centre, she was able to save enough money to enrol in a year of business classes at Miss Gordon's Commercial College, which led her at the age of 16 to a job as an accounting clerk with a local factory. She volunteered regularly with the Legion of Mary, spending her evenings and weekends working with children and visiting inmates at Long Kesh prison. When she was 21 she began working as a secretary for the Guinness brewery, where she remained employed until December 1976.[11][12][13][14]secondnameplaceholder told The Progressive in 2013 that her early Catholic heroes included Dorothy Day and the Berrigan brothers.[15]
<h2>Northern Ireland peace movement (1976–1980)</h2>
secondnameplaceholder became active with the Northern Ireland peace movement after three children of her sister, Anne secondnameplaceholder, were run over and killed by a car driven by Danny Lennon, a Provisional Irish Republican Army (IRA) fugitive who had been fatally shot by British troops while trying to make a getaway. Danny Lennon had been released from prison in April 1976 after serving three years for suspected involvement in the IRA.[16] On 10 August, Lennon and accomplice John Chillingworth were transporting an Armalite rifle through Andersonstown, Belfast, when British troops, claiming to have seen a rifle pointed at them,[17] opened fire on the vehicle, instantly killing Lennon and critically wounding Chillingworth. The car Lennon drove went out of control and mounted a pavement on Finaghy Road North, colliding with Anne secondnameplaceholder and three of her children who were out shopping.[18] Joanne (8) and Andrew (6 weeks) died at the scene; John secondnameplaceholder (2) succumbed to his injuries at a hospital the following day.[19]Betty Williams, a resident of Andersonstown who happened to be driving by, witnessed the tragedy and accused the IRA of firing at the British patrol and provoking the incident.[20] In the days that followed she began gathering signatures for a peace petition from Protestants and Catholics and was able to assemble some 200 women to march for peace in Belfast. The march passed near the home of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (then firstnameplaceholder Corrigan) who joined it. She and Williams thus became "the joint leaders of a virtually spontaneous mass movement."[21]The next march, to the burial sites of the three secondnameplaceholder children, brought 10,000 Protestant and Catholic women together. The marchers, including secondnameplaceholder and Williams, were physically attacked by IRA members. By the end of the month secondnameplaceholder and Williams had brought 35,000 people onto the streets of Belfast petitioning for peace between the republican and loyalist factions.[22] Initially adopting the name "Women for Peace," the movement changed its name to the gender-neutral "Community of Peace People," or simply "Peace People," when Irish Press correspondent Ciaran McKeown joined.[23] In contrast with the prevailing climate at the time,[24] secondnameplaceholder was convinced that the most effective way to end the violence was not through violence but through re-education.[25] The organization published a biweekly paper, Peace by Peace, and provided for families of prisoners a bus service to and from Belfast's jails.[26] In 1977, she and Betty Williams received the 1976 Nobel Peace Prize for their efforts.[8] Aged 32 at the time, she was the youngest Nobel Peace Prize laureate until Malala Yousafzai was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2014.[27]
<h2>After the Nobel Prize (1980–present)</h2>
Though Betty Williams resigned from the Peace People in 1980,[28] secondnameplaceholder has continued her involvement in the organization to this day and has served as the group's honorary president.[26] It has since taken on a more global agenda, addressing an array of social and political issues from around the world.In January 1980, after a prolonged battle with depression over the loss of her children in the 1976 Finaghy Road incident, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's sister Anne committed suicide.[29][30][31] A year and a half later, in September 1981, firstnameplaceholder married Jackie secondnameplaceholder, who was her late sister's widower.[32] She has three stepchildren and two children of her own, John Francis (b. 1982) and Luke (b. 1984).[9]In 1981 secondnameplaceholder co-founded the Committee on the Administration of Justice, a nonsectarian organisation dedicated to defending human rights.[9][33]She is a member[as of?] of the anti-abortion group Consistent Life Ethic, which is against abortion, capital punishment and euthanasia.[34][third-party source needed]secondnameplaceholder has been involved in a number of campaigns on behalf of political prisoners around the world. In 1993 she and six other Nobel Peace Prize laureates tried unsuccessfully to enter Myanmar from Thailand to protest the protracted detention of opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi.[35] She was a first signatory on a 2008 petition calling on Turkey to end its torture of Kurdish leader Abdullah Öcalan.[36] In October 2010, she signed a petition calling on China to release Nobel Peace Prize laureate Liu Xiaobo from house arrest.[37]secondnameplaceholder was selected in 2003 to serve on the honorary board of the International Coalition for the Decade, a coalition of national and international groups, presided over by Christian Renoux, whose aim was to promote the United Nations' 1998 vision of the first decade of the twenty-first century as the International Decade for the Promotion of a Culture of Peace and Non-Violence for the Children of the World.[38][39]In 2006, secondnameplaceholder was one of the founders of the Nobel Women's Initiative along with fellow Peace Prize laureates Betty Williams, Shirin Ebadi, Wangari Maathai, Jody Williams, and Rigoberta Menchú Tum. The Initiative describes itself as six women representing North and South America, Europe, the Middle East, and Africa who decided to bring together their "extraordinary experiences in a united effort for peace with justice and equality" and "to help strengthen work being done in support of women's rights around the world".[40]secondnameplaceholder supported the Occupy movement and has described WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange as "very courageous". She has also praised Chelsea Manning. "I think they’ve been tremendously courageous in telling the truth", she has said, adding that "the American government and NATO have destroyed Iraq and Afghanistan. Their next targets will be Syria and Iran".[15]Together with Desmond Tutu and Adolfo Pérez Esquivel, secondnameplaceholder published a letter in support of Chelsea Manning, saying:"The words attributed to Manning reveal that he went through a profound moral struggle between the time he enlisted and when he became a whistleblower. Through his experience in Iraq, he became disturbed by top-level policy that undervalued human life and caused the suffering of innocent civilians and soldiers. Like other courageous whistleblowers, he was driven foremost by a desire to reveal the truth".[41]secondnameplaceholder has also earned a degree from the Irish School of Ecumenics at Trinity College Dublin. She works with various interchurch and interfaith organizations and is a councilor with the International Peace Council. She is also a Patron of the Methodist Theological College, and of the Northern Ireland Council for Integrated Education.[42]In April 2019 secondnameplaceholder collected the 2019 GUE/NGL Award for Journalists, Whistleblowers & Defenders of the Right to Information on behalf of Julian Assange who was at the time imprisoned by the United Kingdom.[43]firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder is an outspoken critic of U.S. and British policy in the Middle East, particularly in Iraq and Afghanistan. She has also been personally critical of U.S. President Barack Obama’s leadership. Her activism in the U.S. has occasionally brought her into confrontations with the law.After initially accepting an invitation to a 2012 Nobel summit in Chicago, she changed her mind because the event was hosted by the U.S. State Department, "and to me the Nobel Peace laureates should not be hosted by a State Department that is continuing with war, removing basic civil liberties and human rights and international law and then talking about peace to young people. That’s a double standard".secondnameplaceholder said in a 2013 interview that ever since her 40-day fast and arrest outside the White House in 2003 (see below), "whenever I now come into America, I’m always questioned as to what my background is".[15]In 2015, secondnameplaceholder spoke with Democracy Now in a sit-down interview titled, "No to Violence, Yes to Dialogue", which included two other Nobel Peace Prize Laureates, Jody Williams and Leymah Gbowee. secondnameplaceholder discussed the desire "to end militarism and war, and to build peace and international law and human rights and democracy".[44]firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder voiced strong opposition to the U.N. sanctions against Iraq, which is alleged by some to have resulted in hundreds of thousands of civilian deaths,[45] calling them "unjust and inhuman", "a new kind of bomb", and "even more cruel than weapons".[46] During a visit to Baghdad with Argentinian colleague Adolfo Pérez Esquivel in March 1999, secondnameplaceholder urged then-U.S. President Bill Clinton and British Prime Minister Tony Blair to end the bombing of Iraq and to permit the lifting of U.N. sanction. "I have seen children dying with their mothers next to them and not being able to do anything", secondnameplaceholder said. "They are not soldiers".[47][48]In the aftermath of al-Qaeda's attacks on the U.S. in September 2001, as it became clear that the U.S. would retaliate and deploy troops in Afghanistan, secondnameplaceholder campaigned against the impending war. In India she claimed to have marched with "hundreds of thousands of Indian people walking for peace".[49] In New York, secondnameplaceholder was reported to have marched with 10,000 protesters, purportedly including families of 9/11 victims, as U.S. war planes were already en route to strike Taliban targets in Afghanistan.[50]In the period leading up to the March 2003 invasion of Iraq, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder campaigned vigorously against the anticipated hostilities. Speaking at the 23rd War Resisters' International Conference in Dublin, Ireland in August 2002, secondnameplaceholder called on the Irish government to oppose the Iraq War "in every European and world forum of which they are a part".[51][52] On 17 March 2003, St. Patrick's Day, secondnameplaceholder protested the war outside the United Nations Headquarters with, among other activists, Frida Berrigan. On 19 March, secondnameplaceholder addressed an audience of 300 people in a chapel at Le Moyne College in Syracuse, N.Y. "Armies with all their advanced weapons of mass destruction are facing the Iraqi people who have nothing", she told the crowd. "In anybody's language, it's not fair".[53] Around this time, secondnameplaceholder held a 30-day vigil and began a 40-day liquid fast outside the White House, joined by members of Pax Christi USA and Christian church leaders. As the war got under way in the days that followed, secondnameplaceholder described the invasion as an "ongoing and shameful slaughter". "Daily we sit, facing Mecca in solidarity with our Muslim brothers and sisters in Iraq, and we ask Allah for forgiveness", she said in a statement to the press on 31 March.[54][55][56] secondnameplaceholder would later remark that the media in the U.S. distorted news from Iraq and that the Iraq War was carried out in pursuit of American "economic and military interests".[57] In February 2006 she expressed her belief that George W. Bush and Tony Blair "should be made accountable for illegally taking the world to war and for war crimes against humanity".[58]secondnameplaceholder expressed disappointment with the selection of U.S. President Barack Obama as winner of the 2009 Nobel Peace Prize. "They say this is for his extraordinary efforts to strengthen international diplomacy and co-operation between peoples", she said, "and yet he continues the policy of militarism and occupation of Afghanistan, instead of dialogue and negotiations with all the parties to the conflict. [...] Giving this award to the leader of the most militarised country in the world, which has taken the human family against its will to war, will rightly be seen by many people around the world as a reward for his country’s aggression and domination".[59]After declining to meet with the Dalai Lama during his visit to the U.S. in 2008, citing conflicting travel schedules,[60] Obama declined to meet with the exiled Tibetan spiritual leader again in 2009. secondnameplaceholder condemned what she considered Obama's deliberate refusal to meet with the Dalai Lama, calling it "horrifying".[61]Speaking at the Carl von Ossietzky Medal Award Ceremony in Berlin in December 2010, secondnameplaceholder imputed criminal accountability to President Obama for violation of international law. "When President Obama says he wants to see a world without nuclear weapons and says, in respect of Iran and their alleged nuclear weapons ambitions, that 'all option  [sic] are on the table,' this is clearly a threat to use nuclear weapons, clearly a criminal threat against Iran, under the world court advisory opinion. The Nuremberg Charter of 8 August 1945 says the threat or use of nuclear weapons is criminal, so officials in all nine nuclear weapons states who maintain and use nuclear deterrence as a threat are committing crimes and breaking international law".[62]firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was twice arrested in the United States. On 17 March 2003, she was arrested outside the United Nations headquarters in New York City during a protest against the Iraq War. Later that month, on 27 March, she was one of 65 anti-war protesters briefly taken into custody by police after penetrating a security barricade near the White House.[63][64]In May 2009, following a visit to Guatemala, immigration authorities at the Houston Airport in Texas detained secondnameplaceholder for a number of hours, during which time she was questioned, fingerprinted and photographed, and consequently missed her connecting flight to Northern Ireland. "They insisted I must tick the box in the Immigration form admitting to criminal activities," she explained.[65] In late July that same year, secondnameplaceholder was again detained by immigration authorities, this time at the Dulles International Airport in Virginia, on her way from Ireland to New Mexico to meet with colleague Jody Williams. As in May, the delay resulted in secondnameplaceholder missing her connecting flight.[66]A 2013 profile of secondnameplaceholder in The Progressive noted that "she hasn’t lost her passion yet" and that "it is the Israeli occupation of Palestine that has occupied much of her attention in recent years".[15]firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder first visited Israel at age 40 in 1984. She came then as part of an interfaith initiative seeking forgiveness from Jews for years of persecution by Christians in Jesus' name. Her second visit was in June 2000, this time in response to invitations from Rabbis for Human Rights and the Israeli Committee Against House Demolitions. The two groups had taken upon themselves to defend Ahmed Shamasneh in an Israeli military court against charges of illegally constructing his home in the West Bank town of Qatanna, and secondnameplaceholder traveled to Israel to observe the court proceedings and support the Shamasneh family.[67][68]In a 2013 interview, she omitted any mention of her 1984 trip to Israel, saying that "I first went to Israel/Palestine at the invitation of Rabbis for Human Rights and the Israeli Committee against House Demolitions" and "was absolutely horrified" at Palestinians' living conditions. It was after that visit that she "started going on a regular basis" because she was "very hopeful that there is a solution to the Israeli/Palestinian injustice. In Northern Ireland, people said there would never be a solution. But once people begin to have the political will and force their governments to sit down, it can happen".[15]
secondnameplaceholder has at times been fiercely critical of the State of Israel, even calling for its membership in the United Nations to be revoked or suspended.[69] She has accused the Israeli government of "carrying out a policy of ethnic cleansing against Palestinians...in east Jerusalem"[70] and supports boycott and divestment initiatives against Israel.[71][72] Concomitantly, secondnameplaceholder has also said that she loves Israel[73][74] and that "to live in Israel for Jewish people, is to live in fear of suicide bombs and Kassam rockets".[75]firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder has been a vocal supporter of Mordechai Vanunu, a former Israeli nuclear technician who revealed details of Israel's nuclear defence program to the British press in 1986 and subsequently served 18 years in prison for treason.[76] secondnameplaceholder flew to Israel in April 2004 to greet Vanunu upon his release[77] and has since flown to meet with him in Israel on several occasions.secondnameplaceholder has described as "draconian" the terms of Vanunu's parole – including a special order prohibiting contact with foreign journalists and a refusal to allow him to leave Israel – and said he "remains a virtual prisoner".[78] In an open letter addressed to the Israeli people in July 2010, after Vanunu was returned to prison for violating the terms of his parole, secondnameplaceholder urged Jews in Israel to petition their government for Vanunu's release and freedom. She praised Vanunu as "a man of peace", "a great visionary", "a true Gandhian spirit" and compared his actions to those of Alfred Nobel.[79]At a joint press conference with Mordechai Vanunu in Jerusalem in December 2004, secondnameplaceholder compared Israel's nuclear weapons to the Nazi gas chambers in Auschwitz. "When I think about nuclear weapons, I've been to Auschwitz concentration camp". She added, "Nuclear weapons are only gas chambers perfected ... and for a people who already know what gas chambers are, how can you even think of building perfect gas chambers".[80]In January 2006, close to Holocaust Memorial Day, secondnameplaceholder asked that Mordechai Vanunu be remembered together with the Jews that perished in the Holocaust. "As we, with sorrow and sadness, remember the Holocaust Victims, we remember too those individuals of conscience who refused to be silenced in the face of danger and paid with their freedom and lives in defending their Jewish brothers and sisters, and we remember our brother Mordechai Vanunu – the lonely Israeli prisoner in his own country, who refused to be silent".[81]In a speech delivered in February 2006 to the Nuclear Age Peace Foundation in Santa Barbara, California, secondnameplaceholder again made a comparison between nuclear weapons and the Nazis. "Last April some of us protested at Dimona Nuclear Plant, in Israel, calling for it to be open to UN Inspection, and bombs to be destroyed. Israeli Jets flew overhead, and a train passed into the Dimona nuclear site. This brought back to me vivid memories of my visit to Auschwitz concentration camp, with its rail tracks, trains, destruction and death".[82]secondnameplaceholder firmly denied comparing Israel to Nazi Germany in an interview with Tal Schneider of Lady Globes in November 2010. "I have for years been speaking out against nuclear weapons. I am actively opposed to nuclear weapons in Britain, in the United States, in Israel, in any country, because nuclear weapons are the ultimate destruction of humankind. But I have never said that Israel is like Nazi Germany, and I don't know why I am quoted like that in Israel. I also never compared Gaza to an extermination camp. I visited the death camps in Austria, with Nobel Prize laureate Elie Wiesel, and I think it is terrible that people did not try to stop the genocide of the Jewish people".[83]secondnameplaceholder said in a 2007 speech that Israel's separation wall "is a monument to fear and failed politics" and that "for many Palestinians daily living is so hard, it is indeed an act of resistance." She praised the "inspirational work of the International Solidarity Movement" and paid tribute to the memory of "Rachel Corrie, who gave her life protesting the demolition of Palestinian homes by Israeli military", saying that "it is the Rachels of this world who reminds us that we are responsible for each other, and we are interconnected in a mysteriously spiritual and beautiful way".[84]secondnameplaceholder declared in a December 2011 interview that "Hamas is an elected party and should be recognized as such by all. It has the democratic vote and should be recognised". She pointed out that on her 2008 Gaza trip she had been invited to speak "to the Hamas parliament".[85]On 20 April 2007, secondnameplaceholder participated in a protest against the construction of Israel's separation barrier outside the Palestinian village of Bil'in. The protest was held in a no-access military zone. Israeli forces used tear-gas grenades and rubber-coated bullets in an effort to disperse the protesters, while the protesters hurled rocks at the Israeli troops, injuring two Border Guard policemen. One rubber bullet hit secondnameplaceholder in the leg, whereupon she was transferred to an Israeli hospital for treatment. She was also reported to have inhaled large quantities of tear gas.[86][87][88]In October 2008, secondnameplaceholder arrived in Gaza aboard the SS Dignity. Although Israel had insisted that the yacht would not be permitted to approach Gaza, then-Prime Minister Ehud Olmert ultimately capitulated and allowed the ship to sail to its destination without incident.[89] During her stay in Gaza, secondnameplaceholder met with Hamas leader Ismail Haniyeh. She was photographed accepting an honorary golden plate depicting the Palestinian flag draped over all of Israel and the occupied territories.[90][91]In March 2009 firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder joined a campaign for the immediate and unconditional removal of Hamas from the European Union list of proscribed terrorist organisations.[92]On 30 June 2009, secondnameplaceholder was taken into custody by the Israeli military along with twenty others, including former U.S. Congresswoman Cynthia McKinney. She was on board a small ferry, the MV Spirit of Humanity (formerly the Arion), said to be carrying humanitarian aid to the Gaza Strip,[93] when Israel intercepted the vessel off the coast of Gaza. From an Israeli prison, she gave a lengthy interview with Democracy Now! via cell phone,[94] and was deported on 7 July 2009 to Dublin.[95] on 2 July 2009. In the interview, she rejected Israeli authorities' claim that aid can pass freely into Gaza, charging that "Gaza is like a huge prison...a huge occupied territory of one-and-a-half million people who have been subjected to collective punishment by the Israeli government". She further said that "the tragedy is that the American government, the UN and Europe, they remain silent in the face of the abuse of Palestinian human rights, like freedom, and it’s really tragic". In addition, she claimed that when her boat was approached by Israeli naval vessels in international waters, "we were in grave danger of actually being killed at that point....really we were in a very, very dangerous position. So we were literally hijacked, taken at gunpoint by the Israeli military".[96]In May–June 2010, secondnameplaceholder was a passenger on board the MV Rachel Corrie, one of seven vessels that were part of the Gaza Freedom Flotilla, a flotilla of pro-Palestinian activists that attempted to bust the Israeli-Egyptian blockade of the Gaza Strip. In an interview with BBC Radio Ulster while still at sea, secondnameplaceholder called the blockade an "inhumane, illegal siege."[97] Having been delayed due to mechanical problems, the Rachel Corrie did not actually sail with the flotilla and only approached the Gazan coast several days after the main flotilla did. In contrast with the violence that characterised the arrival of the first six ships, Israel's takeover of the Rachel Corrie was met only with passive resistance. Israeli naval forces were even lowered a ladder by the passengers to assist their ascent onto the deck.[98] After the incident, secondnameplaceholder said she did not feel her life was in danger as the ship's captain, Derek Graham, had been in touch with the Israeli navy to assure them that there would be no violent resistance.[99]On 28 September 2010, secondnameplaceholder landed in Israel as part of a delegation of the Nobel Women's Initiative. She was refused an entry visa by Israeli authorities on the grounds that she had twice in the past tried to run Israel's naval embargo of the Gaza Strip and that a 10-year exclusion order was in effect against her.[100][101] She fought her deportation with the help of Adalah an NGHO devoted to the rights of Palestinians in Israel. Fatmeh El-Ajou, an attorney for Adalah noted, "We believe that the decision to refuse entry to Ms. secondnameplaceholder is based on illegitimate, irrelevant, and arbitrary political considerations".[102] Her legal team filed a petition against the order with the Central District Court on secondnameplaceholder's behalf, but the court ruled pronounced that the deportation order was valid. secondnameplaceholder then appealed to Israel's Supreme Court. Initially, the Court proposed that secondnameplaceholder be allowed to remain in the country for a few days on bail despite the deportation order; however, the state rejected the proposal, arguing that secondnameplaceholder had known prior to her arrival she was barred from entering Israel and that her conduct amounted to taking the law into her own hands. A three-judge panel accepted the state's position and upheld the ruling of the Central District Court. At one point during the hearing, secondnameplaceholder reportedly spoke up, saying that Israel must stop "its apartheid policy and the siege on Gaza". One of the judges scolded her saying, "This is no place for propaganda". firstnameplaceholder Corrigan-secondnameplaceholder was deported on a flight to the UK the following morning, 5 October 2010.[103]As preparations for a second Gaza flotilla got underway in the summer of 2011, with the Irish MV Saoirse expected to take part, secondnameplaceholder expressed her support for the campaign and called on Israel to grant the flotilla passengers safe passage to Gaza.[104]In March 2014, secondnameplaceholder tried to arrive to Gaza through Egypt, as a part of activist delegation which also included the American anti-war activist Medea Benjamin. The members of the delegation were arrested in Cairo, questioned and deported.[105]In 2016, secondnameplaceholder attempted to break Israel's naval blockade of the Gaza Strip along with 13 other activists on board the Women's Boat to Gaza,[106] until they were stopped by the Israeli Navy approximately 40 miles (64 km) offshore. The boat was escorted to the port of Ashdod. The Israeli military said the interception was brief and without injuries. secondnameplaceholder complained that she and the activists were "arrested, kidnapped, illegally, in international waters and taken against our wishes to Israel".[107][108][109]secondnameplaceholder has more than once suggested that Palestinians are more interested in peace than the Israeli government. She said in a 2011 interview that when she and some colleagues left Gaza in 2008, "we were very hopeful because there is a passionate desire among the Palestinian people for peace, and then Operation Cast Lead started the following week. That was horrific". Israel, she said, had killed Palestinian farmers and fishermen who were just "trying to fish for their families", thus proving "that the Israeli government does not want peace".[110] In a 2013 interview, she repeated the same point, saying that in Gaza in 2008, she had been told by Hamas and Fatah leaders "that they want dialogue and peace", yet a week later "Israel bombed Gaza, committing war crimes", showing "that there is no political will for peace in the Israeli government".[15]In October 2012, secondnameplaceholder traveled to New York City to serve on the Russell Tribunal on Israel/Palestine alongside writer Alice Walker, activist Angela Davis, former Congresswoman Cynthia McKinney, and Pink Floyd’s Roger Waters.[15] During her participation in the Russell Tribunal, secondnameplaceholder, according to one report, "asked the question that seems to be taboo in the U.S.: Why does President Barack Obama allow Israel to threaten Iran with war when Iran has signed the NPT and Israel has at least 200 nuclear weapons? Why does the president not demand that Israel sign the NPT?"[111]After her work on the Russell Tribunal was completed secondnameplaceholder said that the experience had "opened the mind, and deepened the understanding of all those present to the facts of the ongoing injustice which the Palestinians are daily suffering under Israeli siege and occupation. The RToP’s findings and conclusions challenge Governments and civil society to have courage and act by implementing sanctions, BDS etc., thereby refusing to be silent and complicit in the face of Israel’s violation of International Laws. The RToP was brilliant, informative and decisive, reminding us that all our Governments, and we the people, have a moral and legal responsibility to act to protect Human Rights and International Law and we cannot be silent when injustice is being done to anyone, anywhere".[112]
<h2>Rohingya issue</h2>
In March 2018, secondnameplaceholder and two Nobel peace laureates Shirin Ebadi and Tawakkol Karman visited Rohingya camps in Cox's Bazar and shared opinions on the crisis. After returning to Dhaka they discussed the Rohingya crisis with members of the civil society of Bangladesh.[113][114]
<h2>Personal philosophy and vision</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder is a proponent of the belief that violence is a disease that humans develop but are not born with. She believes humankind is moving away from a mindset of violence and war and evolving to a higher consciousness of nonviolence and love. Among the figures she considers spiritual prophets in this regard are Jesus, Francis of Assisi, Gandhi, Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan, Fr. John L. McKenzie, and Martin Luther King, Jr.[116][117][118][119]secondnameplaceholder professes to rejects violence in all its forms. "As a pacifist I believe that violence is never justified, and there are always alternatives to force and threat of force. We must challenge the society that tells us there is no such alternative. In all areas of our lives we should adopt nonviolence, in our lifestyles, our education, our commerce, our defence, and our governance."[116] secondnameplaceholder has called for the abolition of all armies and the establishment of a multi-national community of unarmed peacekeepers in their stead.[120]secondnameplaceholder has written a book, The Vision of Peace: Faith and Hope in Northern Ireland.[121] Published in 2010, it is a collection of essays and letters, in many of which she discusses the connections between her political activities and her faith. Most of the book is about Northern Ireland, but secondnameplaceholder also discusses the Holocaust, India, East Timor, and Yugoslavia. secondnameplaceholder writes that "hope for the future depends on each of us taking non-violence into our hearts and minds and developing new and imaginative structures which are non-violent and life-giving for all.... Some people will argue that this is too idealistic. I believe it is very realistic.... We can rejoice and celebrate today because we are living in a miraculous time. Everything is changing and everything is possible."[122]
<h2>Awards and honours</h2>
secondnameplaceholder has received numerous awards and honours in recognition of her work. Yale University awarded secondnameplaceholder an honorary Doctor of Laws degree in 1977.[123] In the same year, she received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement.[124]  The College of New Rochelle awarded her an honorary degree 1978, as well.[125] In 1998 secondnameplaceholder received an honorary degree from Regis University, a Jesuit institution in Denver, Colorado.[126] The University of Rhode Island awarded her an honorary degree in 2000.[127] She was presented with the Science and Peace Gold Medal by the Albert Schweitzer International University in 2006, for meaningfully contributing to the spread of culture and the defence of world peace.[128]In 1990 she was awarded the Pacem in Terris Award, named after a 1963 encyclical letter by Pope John XXIII that called upon all people of good will to secure peace among all nations. The Davenport Catholic Interracial Council extolled secondnameplaceholder for her peace efforts in Northern Ireland and for being "a global force against violence in the name of religion."[129] Pacem in terris is Latin for "Peace on Earth".The Nuclear Age Peace Foundation honoured secondnameplaceholder with the Distinguished Peace Leadership Award in 1992, "for her moral leadership and steadfast commitment to social justice and nonviolence."[130]
<h2>Criticism</h2>
Referring to the decision to award firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder and Betty Williams the 1976 Nobel Peace Prize, journalist Michael Binyon of The Times commented, "The Nobel committee has made controversial awards before. Some have appeared to reward hope rather than achievement." He described as sadly "negligible" the two women's contribution to bringing peace to Northern Ireland.[131]Alex Maskey of Sinn Féin charged that at the time of the Troubles, the Peace People movement was hijacked by the British government and used to turn public opinion against Irish republicanism. "For me and others, the Peace People and their good intentions were quickly exploited and absorbed into British state policy," Maskey opined.[132]Derek Brown, the Belfast correspondent for The Guardian, wrote that secondnameplaceholder and Betty Williams were "both formidably articulate and, in the best possible sense, utterly naive." He described their call for an end to violence in response to the will of the people as an "awesomely impractical demand."[133]In his extensive study of the Peace People movement, Rob Fairmichael found that the Peace People were seen by some as being "more anti-IRA than anti-UDA," i.e. less loyal to republican factions than to loyalist ones. Fairmichael also noted that "Betty Williams and firstnameplaceholder Corrigan were beaten up numerous times and at times the leaders were threatened by a hostile crowd." Fairmichael noted, as examples of forms that some of the extreme negative reactions took.[134]While most Nobel Prize laureates keep their prize money,[135] it is not uncommon for prize winners to donate prize money to scientific, cultural or humanitarian causes.[136] Upon announcing their intention to keep their prize funds, secondnameplaceholder and Williams were severely criticised.[137][by whom?] The move angered many people, including members of the Peace People, and fuelled unpleasant rumours about the two women.[138] Rob Fairmichael writes of "gossip of fur coats" and concludes that the prize money controversy was perceived by the public, in the context of the Peace People’s eventual decline, as specifically problematic.[139]In the wake of the 2009 Gaza flotilla, Ben-Dror Yemini, a popular columnist for the Israeli daily Ma'ariv, wrote that secondnameplaceholder was obsessed with Israel. "There is a lunatic coalition that does not concern itself with the slaughtered in Sri Lanka or with the oppressed Tibetans. They see only the struggle against the Israeli Satan." He further charged that secondnameplaceholder chose to identify with a population that elected an openly antisemitic movement to lead it – one whose raison d'etre is the destruction of the Jewish state.[140]Eliaz Luf, the deputy head of the Israeli foreign mission to Canada, has argued that secondnameplaceholder's activism plays into the hands of Hamas and other terrorist organisations in Gaza.[141]Michael Elterman, Chairman of the Canada-Israel Committee Pacific Region, warned that secondnameplaceholder's actions, though probably well-intentioned, have promoted a hateful, antisemitic agenda.[142]In a 4 October 2010 editorial entitled "The disingenuous Nobel laureate," the Jerusalem Post called secondnameplaceholder's comparison of Israel's nuclear weapons to the gas chambers of Auschwitz "outrageous" and maintained that "Israel can and must use its sovereignty to stop people like secondnameplaceholder who are essentially seeking to endanger the lives of Israeli citizens." The Post applauded secondnameplaceholder's expulsion from Israel, "not because of secondnameplaceholder's outrageous comparison in 2004 of Israel’s purported nuclear capability to Auschwitz’s gas chambers, nor because of her absurd, reprehensible accusation made in court Monday that Israel is an "apartheid state" perpetrating "ethnic cleansing against Palestinians," but because she had taken "actions that undermine Israel’s ability to protect itself.""[143]The Post argued that if secondnameplaceholder and others "truly desire to improve the lives of Gazans, they should send their humanitarian aid in coordination with Israel," pressure Hamas "and the other radical Islamists who control the Gaza Strip to stop senseless ballistic attacks on Israeli towns and villages, kibbutzim and moshavim," and "insist that Hamas provide Gaza’s citizens with a stable, responsible leadership that respects human rights and religious freedom, as well as that it accept the UN-recognized right of the Jewish people to self-determination and political sovereignty in their historical homeland." But secondnameplaceholder "seems more intent on enabling Israel’s terrorist enemies," exploiting "charges of a 'humanitarian crisis' in Gaza in order to empower Hamas terrorists."[144] Jewish and Israeli opinion is not all negative. Following the June 2010 Gaza flotilla raid, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu was careful to distinguish between firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's nonviolent resistance aboard the Rachel Corrie, which he referred to as "a flotilla of peace activists – with whom we disagree, but whose right to a different opinion we respect," and the conduct of the activists aboard the other six vessels, which he described as "a flotilla of hate, organized by violent, terrorism-supporting extremists."[145] Gideon Levy strongly defended Mairéad secondnameplaceholder in the Israeli newspaper Haaretz in October 2010, calling her "the victim of state terror" after Israel refused to allow her to enter the country and kept her detained for several days.[146]
(!!)Article(!/!)
Muhammad firstnameplaceholder el-secondnameplaceholder[a] (25 December 1918 – 6 October 1981) was an Egyptian politician who served as the third President of Egypt, from 15 October 1970 until his assassination by fundamentalist army officers on 6 October 1981. secondnameplaceholder was a senior member of the Free Officers who overthrew King Farouk in the Egyptian Revolution of 1952, and a close confidant of President Gamal Abdel Nasser, under whom he served as Vice President twice and whom he succeeded as president in 1970. In 1978, secondnameplaceholder and Menachem Begin, Prime Minister of Israel, signed a peace treaty in cooperation with United States President Jimmy Carter, for which they were recognized with the Nobel Peace Prize.In his eleven years as president, he changed Egypt's trajectory, departing from many of the political and economic tenets of Nasserism, re-instituting a multi-party system, and launching the Infitah economic policy. As President, he led Egypt in the Yom Kippur War of 1973 to regain Egypt's Sinai Peninsula, which Israel had occupied since the Six-Day War of 1967, making him a hero in Egypt and, for a time, the wider Arab World. Afterwards, he engaged in negotiations with Israel, culminating in the Egypt–Israel Peace Treaty; this won him and Menachem Begin the Nobel Peace Prize, making secondnameplaceholder the first Muslim Nobel laureate. Although reaction to the treaty—which resulted in the return of Sinai to Egypt—was generally favorable among Egyptians,[5] it was rejected by the country's Muslim Brotherhood and the left, which felt secondnameplaceholder had abandoned efforts to ensure a Palestinian state.[5] With the exception of Sudan, the Arab world and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) strongly opposed secondnameplaceholder's efforts to make a separate peace with Israel without prior consultations with the Arab states.[5] His refusal to reconcile with them over the Palestinian issue resulted in Egypt being suspended from the Arab League from 1979 to 1989.[6][7][8][9] The peace treaty was also one of the primary factors that led to his assassination; on 6 October 1981, militants led by Khalid Islambouli opened fire on secondnameplaceholder with automatic rifles during the 6 October parade in Cairo, killing him.
<h2>Early life and revolutionary activities</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was born on 25 December 1918 in Mit Abu El Kom, Monufia, Egypt to a poor family, one of 13 brothers and sisters.[10] One of his brothers, Atef secondnameplaceholder, later became a pilot and was killed in action during the October War of 1973.[11] His father, firstnameplaceholder Mohammed El secondnameplaceholder was an Upper Egyptian, and his mother, Sit Al-Berain, was Sudanese from her father.[12][13]He graduated from the Royal Military Academy in Cairo in 1938[14] and was appointed to the Signal Corps. He entered the army as a second lieutenant and was posted to Sudan (Egypt and Sudan were one country at the time). There, he met Gamal Abdel Nasser, and along with several other junior officers they formed the secret Free Officers, an organization committed to expelling the British presence from Egypt and removing royal corruption.[15]During the Second World War he was imprisoned by the British for his efforts to obtain help from the Axis Powers in expelling the occupying British forces. firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was active in many political movements, including the Muslim Brotherhood, the fascist Young Egypt, the pro-palace Iron Guard of Egypt, and the secret military group called the Free Officers.[16] Along with his fellow Free Officers, secondnameplaceholder participated in the military coup that launched the Egyptian Revolution of 1952, which overthrew King Farouk on 23 July of that year. secondnameplaceholder was assigned to announce the news of the revolution to the Egyptian people over the radio networks.
<h2>During Nasser's presidency</h2>
During the presidency of Gamal Abdel Nasser, secondnameplaceholder was appointed minister of State in 1954. He was also appointed editor of the newly founded daily Al Gomhuria.[17] In 1959, he assumed the position of Secretary to the National Union. secondnameplaceholder was the President of the National Assembly (1960–1968) and then vice president and member of the presidential council in 1964. He was reappointed as vice president again in December 1969.
<h2>Presidency</h2>
Some of the major events of secondnameplaceholder's presidency were his "Corrective Revolution" to consolidate power, the break with Egypt's long-time ally and aid-giver the USSR, the 1973 October War with Israel, the Camp David peace treaty with Israel, the "opening up" (or Infitah) of Egypt's economy, and lastly his assassination in 1981.secondnameplaceholder succeeded Nasser as president after the latter's death in October 1970.[18] secondnameplaceholder's presidency was widely expected to be short-lived.[19] Viewing him as having been little more than a puppet of the former president, Nasser's supporters in government settled on secondnameplaceholder as someone they could manipulate easily. secondnameplaceholder surprised everyone with a series of astute political moves by which he was able to retain the presidency and emerge as a leader in his own right.[20] On 15 May 1971,[21] secondnameplaceholder announced his Corrective Revolution, purging the government, political and security establishments of the most ardent Nasserists. secondnameplaceholder encouraged the emergence of an Islamist movement, which had been suppressed by Nasser. Believing Islamists to be socially conservative he gave them "considerable cultural and ideological autonomy" in exchange for political support.[22]In 1971, three years into the War of Attrition in the Suez Canal zone, secondnameplaceholder endorsed in a letter the peace proposals of UN negotiator Gunnar Jarring, which seemed to lead to a full peace with Israel on the basis of Israel's withdrawal to its pre-war borders. This peace initiative failed as neither Israel nor the United States of America accepted the terms as discussed then.[23]Shortly after taking office, secondnameplaceholder shocked many Egyptians by dismissing and imprisoning two of the most powerful figures in the regime, Vice President Ali Sabri, who had close ties with Soviet officials, and Sharawy Gomaa, the Interior Minister, who controlled the secret police.[19] secondnameplaceholder's rising popularity would accelerate after he cut back the powers of the hated secret police,[19] expelled Soviet military from the country[24] and reformed the Egyptian army for a renewed confrontation with Israel.[19]On 6 October 1973, in conjunction with Hafez al-Assad of Syria, secondnameplaceholder launched the October War, also known as the Yom Kippur War (and less commonly as the Ramadan War), a surprise attack against the Israeli forces occupying the Egyptian Sinai Peninsula,[25] and the Syrian Golan Heights in an attempt to retake these respective Egyptian and Syrian territories that had been occupied by Israel since the Six Day War six years earlier. The Egyptian and Syrian performance in the initial stages of the war astonished both Israel, and the Arab World. The most striking achievement (Operation Badr, also known as The Crossing) was the Egyptian military's advance approximately 15 km into the occupied Sinai Peninsula after penetrating and largely destroying the Bar Lev Line. This line was popularly thought to have been an impregnable defensive chain.As the war progressed, three divisions of the Israeli army led by General Ariel Sharon had crossed the Suez Canal, trying to encircle first the Egyptian Second Army. Although this failed, prompted by an agreement between the United States of America and the Soviet Union, the United Nations Security Council passed Resolution 338 on 22 October 1973, calling for an immediate ceasefire.[26] Although agreed upon, the ceasefire was immediately broken.[27] Alexei Kosygin, the Chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers, cancelled an official meeting with Danish Prime Minister Anker Jørgensen to travel to Egypt where he tried to persuade secondnameplaceholder to sign a peace treaty. During Kosygin's two-day long stay it is unknown if he and secondnameplaceholder ever met in person.[28] The Israeli military then continued their drive to encircle the Egyptian army. The encirclement was completed on 24 October, three days after the ceasefire was broken. This development prompted superpower tension, but a second ceasefire was imposed cooperatively on 25 October to end the war. At the conclusion of hostilities, Israeli forces were 40 kilometres (25 mi) from Damascus and 101 kilometres (63 mi) from Cairo.[29]The initial Egyptian and Syrian victories in the war restored popular morale throughout Egypt and the Arab World and, for many years after, secondnameplaceholder was known as the "Hero of the Crossing". Israel recognized Egypt as a formidable foe, and Egypt's renewed political significance eventually led to regaining and reopening the Suez Canal through the peace process. His new peace policy led to the conclusion of two agreements on disengagement of forces with the Israeli government. The first of these agreements was signed on 18 January 1974, and the second on 4 September 1975.One major aspect of secondnameplaceholder's peace policy was to gain some religious support for his efforts. Already during his visit to the US in October–November 1975, he invited Evangelical pastor Billy Graham for an official visit, which was held a few days after secondnameplaceholder's visit.[31] In addition to cultivating relations with Evangelical Christians in the US, he also built some cooperation with the Vatican. On 8 April 1976, he visited the Vatican for the first time, and got a message of support from Pope Paul VI regarding achieving peace with Israel, to include a just solution to the Palestinian issue.[32] secondnameplaceholder, on his part, extended to the Pope a public invitation to visit Cairo.[33][failed verification]secondnameplaceholder also used the media to promote his purposes. In an interview he gave to the Lebanese paper El Hawadeth in early February 1976, he claimed he had secret commitment from the US government to put pressure on the Israeli government for a major withdrawal in Sinai and the Golan Heights.[34] This statement caused some concern to the Israeli government, but Kissinger denied such a promise was ever made.[35]In January 1977, a series of 'Bread Riots' protested secondnameplaceholder's economic liberalization and specifically a government decree lifting price controls on basic necessities like bread. The riots lasted for two days and included hundreds of thousands in Cairo. 120 buses and hundreds of buildings were destroyed in Cairo alone.[36] The riots ended with the deployment of the army and the re-institution of the subsidies/price controls.[37][38] During this time, secondnameplaceholder was also taking a new approach towards improving relations with the West.[19]The United States and the Soviet Union agreed on 1 October 1977, on principles to govern a Geneva conference on the Middle East.[19] Syria continued to resist such a conference.[19] Not wanting either Syria or the Soviet Union to influence the peace process, secondnameplaceholder decided to take more progressive stance towards building a comprehensive peace agreement with Israel.[19]On 19 November 1977, secondnameplaceholder became the first Arab leader to visit Israel officially when he met with Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin, and spoke before the Knesset in Jerusalem about his views on how to achieve a comprehensive peace to the Arab–Israeli conflict, which included the full implementation of UN Resolutions 242 and 338. He said during his visit that he hopes "that we can keep the momentum in Geneva, and may God guide the steps of Premier Begin and Knesset, because there is a great need for hard and drastic decision".[39]The Peace treaty was finally signed by firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder and Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin in Washington, D.C., United States, on 26 March 1979, following the Camp David Accords (1978), a series of meetings between Egypt and Israel facilitated by US President Jimmy Carter. Both secondnameplaceholder and Begin were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for creating the treaty. In his acceptance speech, secondnameplaceholder referred to the long-awaited peace desired by both Arabs and Israelis:The main features of the agreement were the mutual recognition of each country by the other, the cessation of the state of war that had existed since the 1948 Arab–Israeli War, and the complete withdrawal by Israel of its armed forces and civilians from the rest of the Sinai Peninsula, which Israel had captured during the 1967 Six-Day War.The agreement also provided for the free passage of Israeli ships through the Suez Canal and recognition of the Strait of Tiran and the Gulf of Aqaba as international waterways. The agreement notably made Egypt the first Arab country to officially recognize Israel. The peace agreement between Egypt and Israel has remained in effect since the treaty was signed.The treaty was extremely unpopular in most of the Arab World and the wider Muslim World.[41] His predecessor Nasser had made Egypt an icon of Arab nationalism, an ideology that appeared to be sidelined by an Egyptian orientation following the 1973 war (see Egypt). The neighboring Arab countries believed that in signing the accords, secondnameplaceholder had put Egypt's interests ahead of Arab unity, betraying Nasser's pan-Arabism, and destroyed the vision of a united "Arab front" for the support of the Palestinians against the "Zionist Entity". However, secondnameplaceholder decided early on that peace was the solution.[19][42] secondnameplaceholder's shift towards a strategic relationship with the US was also seen as a betrayal by many Arabs. In the United States his peace moves gained him popularity among some Evangelical circles. He was awarded the Prince of Peace Award by Pat Robertson.[43]In 1979, the Arab League suspended Egypt in the wake of the Egyptian–Israel peace agreement, and the League moved its headquarters from Cairo to Tunis. Arab League member states believed in the elimination of the "Zionist Entity" and Israel at that time. It was not until 1989 that the League re-admitted Egypt as a member, and returned its headquarters to Cairo. As part of the peace deal, Israel withdrew from the Sinai Peninsula in phases, completing its withdrawal from the entire territory except the town of Taba by 25 April 1982 (withdrawal from which did not occur until 1989).[19] The improved relations Egypt gained with the West through the Camp David Accords soon gave the country resilient economic growth.[19] By 1980, however, Egypt's strained relations with the Arab World would result in a period of rapid inflation.[19]The relationship between Iran and Egypt had fallen into open hostility during Gamal Abdel Nasser's presidency. Following his death in 1970, President secondnameplaceholder turned this around quickly into an open and close friendship.In 1971, secondnameplaceholder addressed the Iranian parliament in Tehran in fluent Persian, describing the 2,500-year-old historic connection between the two lands.Overnight, the Egyptian and Iranian governments were turned from bitter enemies into fast friends. The relationship between Cairo and Tehran became so friendly that the Shah of Iran, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, called secondnameplaceholder his "dear brother".After the 1973 war with Israel, Iran assumed a leading role in cleaning up and reactivating the blocked Suez Canal with heavy investment. The country also facilitated the withdrawal of Israel from the occupied Sinai Peninsula by promising to substitute the loss of the oil to the Israelis with free Iranian oil if they withdrew from the Egyptian oil wells in western Sinai.All these added more to the personal friendship between secondnameplaceholder and the Shah of Iran. (The Shah's first wife was Princess Fawzia of Egypt. She was the eldest daughter of Sultan Fuad I of Egypt and Sudan (later King Fuad I) and his second wife Nazli Sabri.)After his overthrow, the deposed Shah spent the last months of his life in exile in Egypt. When the Shah died, secondnameplaceholder ordered that he be given a state funeral and be interred at the Al-Rifa'i Mosque in Cairo, the resting place of Egyptian Khedive Isma'il Pasha, his mother Khushyar Hanim, and numerous other members of the royal family of Egypt and Sudan.[44]The last months of secondnameplaceholder's presidency were marked by internal uprising.[19] secondnameplaceholder dismissed allegations that the rioting was incited by domestic issues, believing that the Soviet Union was recruiting its regional allies in Libya and Syria to incite an uprising that would eventually force him out of power.[19] Following a failed military coup in June 1981, secondnameplaceholder ordered a major crackdown that resulted in the arrest of numerous opposition figures.[19] Although secondnameplaceholder still maintained high levels of popularity in Egypt,[19] it has been said that he was assassinated "at the peak" of his unpopularity.[45]Earlier in his presidency, Islamists had benefited from the 'rectification revolution' and the release from prison of activists jailed under Nasser.[21] But secondnameplaceholder's Sinai treaty with Israel enraged Islamists, particularly the radical Egyptian Islamic Jihad. According to interviews and information gathered by journalist Lawrence Wright, the group was recruiting military officers and accumulating weapons, waiting for the right moment to launch "a complete overthrow of the existing order" in Egypt. Chief strategist of El-Jihad was Abbud al-Zumar, a colonel in the military intelligence whose "plan was to kill the main leaders of the country, capture the headquarters of the army and State Security, the telephone exchange building, and of course the radio and television building, where news of the Islamic revolution would then be broadcast, unleashing—he expected—a popular uprising against secular authority all over the country".[46]In February 1981, Egyptian authorities were alerted to El-Jihad's plan by the arrest of an operative carrying crucial information. In September, secondnameplaceholder ordered a highly unpopular roundup of more than 1,500 people, including many Jihad members, but also the Coptic Pope and other Coptic clergy, intellectuals and activists of all ideological stripes.[47] All non-government press was banned as well.[48] The round up missed a Jihad cell in the military led by Lieutenant Khalid Islambouli, who would succeed in assassinating firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder that October.[49]According to Tala'at Qasim, ex-head of the Gama'a Islamiyya interviewed in Middle East Report, it was not Islamic Jihad but his organization, known in English as the "Islamic Group", that organized the assassination and recruited the assassin (Islambouli). Members of the Group's 'Majlis el-Shura' ('Consultative Council') – headed by the famed 'blind shaykh' – were arrested two weeks before the killing, but they did not disclose the existing plans and Islambouli succeeded in assassinating secondnameplaceholder.[50]On 6 October 1981, secondnameplaceholder was assassinated during the annual victory parade held in Cairo to celebrate Egypt's crossing of the Suez Canal.[51] Islambouli emptied his assault rifle into secondnameplaceholder's body while in the front of the grandstand, mortally wounding the President. In addition to secondnameplaceholder, eleven others were killed, including the Cuban ambassador, an Omani general, a Coptic Orthodox bishop and Samir Helmy, the head of Egypt's Central Auditing Agency (CAA).[52][53] Twenty-eight were wounded, including Vice President Hosni Mubarak, Irish Defence Minister James Tully, and four US military liaison officers.The assassination squad was led by Lieutenant Khalid Islambouli after a fatwā approving the assassination had been obtained from Omar Abdel-Rahman.[54] Islambouli was tried, found guilty, sentenced to death, and executed by firing squad in April 1982.
<h2>Aftermath</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was succeeded by his vice president Hosni Mubarak, whose hand was injured during the attack. secondnameplaceholder's funeral was attended by a record number of dignitaries from around the world, including a rare simultaneous attendance by three former US presidents: Gerald Ford, Jimmy Carter and Richard Nixon. Sudan's President Gaafar Nimeiry was the only Arab head of state to attend the funeral. Only 3 of 24 states in the Arab League—Oman, Somalia and Sudan—sent representatives at all.[55] Israel's prime minister, Menachem Begin, considered secondnameplaceholder a personal friend and insisted on attending the funeral, walking throughout the funeral procession so as not to desecrate the Sabbath.[56] secondnameplaceholder was buried in the unknown soldier memorial in Cairo, across the street from the stand where he was assassinated.Over three hundred Islamic radicals were indicted in the trial of assassin Khalid Islambouli, including future al-Qaeda leader Ayman al-Zawahiri, Omar Abdel-Rahman, and Abd al-Hamid Kishk. The trial was covered by the international press and Zawahiri's knowledge of English made him the de facto spokesman for the defendants. Zawahiri was released from prison in 1984. Abboud al-Zomor and Tareq al-Zomor, two Islamic Jihad leaders imprisoned in connection with the assassination, were released on 11 March 2011.[57]Despite these facts, the nephew of the late president, Talaat secondnameplaceholder, claimed that the assassination was an international conspiracy. On 31 October 2006, he was sentenced to a year in prison for defaming Egypt's armed forces, less than a month after he gave the interview accusing Egyptian generals of masterminding his uncle's assassination. In an interview with a Saudi television channel, he also claimed both the United States and Israel were involved: "No one from the special personal protection group of the late president fired a single shot during the killing, and not one of them has been put on trial," he said.[58]
<h2>Media portrayals of Anwar Sadat</h2>
In 1983, secondnameplaceholder, a miniseries based on the life of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, aired on US television with Oscar-winning actor Louis Gossett, Jr. in the title role. The film was promptly banned by the Egyptian government, as were all other movies produced and distributed by Columbia Pictures, over allegations of historical inaccuracies. A civil lawsuit was brought by Egypt's artists' and film unions against Columbia Pictures and the film's directors, producers and scriptwriters before a court in Cairo, but was dismissed, since the alleged slanders, having taken place outside the country, fell outside the Egyptian courts' jurisdiction.[59]The film was critically acclaimed in North America, but was unpopular among Egyptians and in the Egyptian press. Western authors attributed the film's poor reception in Egypt to racism – Gossett being African-American – in the Egyptian government or Egypt in general.[60] Either way, one Western source wrote that secondnameplaceholder's portrayal by Gossett "bothered race-conscious Egyptians and wouldn't have pleased [the deceased] secondnameplaceholder," who identified as Egyptian and Northeast African, not black.[61] The two-part series earned Gossett an Emmy nomination in the United States.He was portrayed by Robert Loggia in the 1982 television movie A Woman Called Golda, opposite Ingrid Bergman as Golda Meir.The first Egyptian depiction of secondnameplaceholder's life came in 2001, when Ayyam El secondnameplaceholder (English: Days of secondnameplaceholder) was released in Egyptian cinemas. This movie, by contrast, was a major success in Egypt, and was hailed as Ahmed Zaki's greatest performance to date.[62]The young secondnameplaceholder is a major character in Ken Follett's thriller The Key to Rebecca, taking place in World War II Cairo. secondnameplaceholder, at the time a young officer in the Egyptian Army and involved in anti-British revolutionary activities, is presented quite sympathetically; his willingness to cooperate with German spies is clearly shown to derive from his wish to find allies against British occupation of his country, rather than from support of Nazi ideology. Some of the scenes in the book, such as secondnameplaceholder's arrest by the British, closely follow the information provided in secondnameplaceholder's own autobiography.secondnameplaceholder was a recurring character on Saturday Night Live, played by Garrett Morris, who bore a resemblance to secondnameplaceholder.
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (Hebrew: מְנַחֵם בֵּגִין‎ Menaḥem secondnameplaceholder (IPA: [menaˈχem ˈbeɡin] (listen)); Polish: Mieczysław Biegun (Polish birth name), Polish: firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (Polish documents, 1931–1937);[1] Russian: Менахем Вольфович Бегин Menakhem Volfovich secondnameplaceholder; 16 August 1913 – 9 March 1992) was an Israeli politician, founder of Likud and the sixth Prime Minister of Israel. Before the creation of the state of Israel, he was the leader of the Zionist militant group Irgun, the Revisionist breakaway from the larger Jewish paramilitary organization Haganah. He proclaimed a revolt, on 1 February 1944, against the British mandatory government, which was opposed by the Jewish Agency. As head of the Irgun, he targeted the British in Palestine.[2] Later, the Irgun fought the Arabs during the 1947–48 Civil War in Mandatory Palestine and its chief secondnameplaceholder was also noted as "leader of the notorious terrorist organisation" by British government and banned from entering the United Kingdom.[3]secondnameplaceholder was elected to the first Knesset, as head of Herut, the party he founded, and was at first on the political fringe, embodying the opposition to the Mapai-led government and Israeli establishment. He remained in opposition in the eight consecutive elections (except for a national unity government around the Six-Day War), but became more acceptable to the political center. His 1977 electoral victory and premiership ended three decades of Labor Party political dominance.secondnameplaceholder's most significant achievement as Prime Minister was the signing of a peace treaty with Egypt in 1979, for which he and Anwar Sadat shared the Nobel Prize for Peace. In the wake of the Camp David Accords, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) withdrew from the Sinai Peninsula, which was captured from Egypt in the Six-Day War. Later, secondnameplaceholder's government promoted the construction of Israeli settlements in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. secondnameplaceholder authorized the bombing of the Osirak nuclear plant in Iraq and the invasion of Lebanon in 1982 to fight PLO strongholds there, igniting the 1982 Lebanon War. As Israeli military involvement in Lebanon deepened, and the Sabra and Shatila massacre, carried out by Christian Phalangist militia allies of the Israelis, shocked world public opinion,[4] secondnameplaceholder grew increasingly isolated.[5] As IDF forces remained mired in Lebanon and the economy suffered from hyperinflation, the public pressure on secondnameplaceholder mounted. Depressed by the death of his wife Aliza in November 1982, he gradually withdrew from public life, until his resignation in October 1983.
<h2>Biography</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was born to Zeev Dov and Hassia Biegun in what was then Brest-Litovsk in the Russian Empire (today Brest, Belarus). He was the youngest of three children.[6] On his mother's side he was descended from distinguished rabbis. His father, a timber merchant, was a community leader, a passionate Zionist, and an admirer of Theodor Herzl. The midwife who attended his birth was the grandmother of Ariel Sharon.[7]After a year of a traditional cheder education secondnameplaceholder started studying at a "Tachkemoni" school, associated with the religious Zionist movement. In his childhood, secondnameplaceholder, like most Jewish children in his town, was a member of the Zionist scouts movement Hashomer Hatzair. He was a member of Hashomer Hatzair until the age of 13, and at 16, he joined Betar.[8] At 14, he was sent to a Polish government school,[9] where he received a solid grounding in classical literature.secondnameplaceholder studied law at the University of Warsaw, where he learned the oratory and rhetoric skills that became his trademark as a politician, and viewed as demagogy by his critics.[10]During his studies, he organized a self-defense group of Jewish students to counter harassment by anti-Semites on campus.[11] He graduated in 1935, but never practiced law. At this time he became a disciple of Vladimir "Ze'ev" Jabotinsky, the founder of the nationalist Revisionist Zionism movement and its youth wing, Betar.[12] His rise within Betar was rapid: at 22, he shared the dais with his mentor at the Betar World Congress in Kraków.[13] The pre-war Polish government actively supported Zionist youth and paramilitary movements. secondnameplaceholder's leadership qualities were quickly recognised.[citation needed] In 1937[14] he was the active head of Betar in Czechoslovakia and became head of the largest branch, that of Poland. As head of Betar's Polish branch, secondnameplaceholder traveled among regional branches to encourage supporters and recruit new members. To save money, he stayed at the homes of Betar members. During one such visit, he met his future wife Aliza Arnold, who was the daughter of his host. The couple married on 29 May 1939. They had three children: Binyamin, Leah and Hassia.[15][16]Living in Warsaw in Poland, secondnameplaceholder encouraged Betar to set up an organization to bring Polish Jews to Palestine. He unsuccessfully attempted to smuggle 1,500 Jews into Romania at the end of August 1939. Returning to Warsaw afterward, he left three days after the German 1939 invasion began, first to the southwest and then to Wilno.In September 1939, after Germany invaded Poland, secondnameplaceholder, in common with a large part of Warsaw's Jewish leadership, escaped to Wilno (today Vilnius), then eastern Poland, to avoid inevitable arrest. The town was soon occupied by the Soviet Union, but from 28 October 1939, it was the capital of the Republic of Lithuania. Wilno was a predominately Polish and Jewish town; an estimated 40 percent of the population was Jewish, with the YIVO institute located there. As a prominent pre-war Zionist and reserve status officer-cadet, on 20 September 1940, secondnameplaceholder was arrested by the NKVD and detained in the Lukiškės Prison. In later years he wrote about his experience of being tortured. He was accused of being an "agent of British imperialism" and sentenced to eight years in the Soviet gulag camps. On 1 June 1941 he was sent to the Pechora labor camps in Komi Republic, the northern part of European Russia, where he stayed until May 1942. Much later in life, secondnameplaceholder recorded and reflected upon his experiences in the interrogations and life in the camp in his memoir White Nights.In July 1941, just after Germany attacked the Soviet Union, and following his release under the Sikorski–Mayski agreement because he was a Polish national, secondnameplaceholder joined the Free Polish Anders' Army as a corporal officer cadet. He was later sent with the army to Palestine via the Persian Corridor, where he arrived in May 1942.[17]Upon arriving in Palestine, secondnameplaceholder, like many other Polish Jewish soldiers of the Anders' Army, faced a choice between remaining with the Anders' Army to fight Nazi Germany in Europe, or staying in Palestine to fight for establishment of a Jewish state. While he initially wished to remain with the Polish army, he was eventually persuaded to change his mind by his contacts in the Irgun, as well as Polish officers sympathetic to the Zionist cause. Consequently, General Michał Karaszewicz-Tokarzewski, the second-in-command of the Army issued secondnameplaceholder with a "leave of absence without an expiration" which gave secondnameplaceholder official permission to stay in Palestine. In December 1942 he left Anders's Army and joined the Irgun.[18]During the Holocaust, secondnameplaceholder's father was among the 5,000 Brest Jews rounded up by the Nazis at the end of June 1941. Instead of being sent to a forced labor camp, they were shot or drowned in the river. His mother and his elder brother Herzl also were murdered in the Holocaust.[15]secondnameplaceholder quickly made a name for himself as a fierce critic of the dominant Zionist leadership for being too cooperative with the British, and argued that the only way to save the Jews of Europe, who were facing extermination, was to compel the British to leave so that a Jewish state could be established. In 1942 he joined the Irgun (Etzel), an underground Zionist paramilitary organization which had split from the main Jewish military organization, the Haganah, in 1931. secondnameplaceholder assumed the Irgun's leadership in 1944, determined to force the British government to remove its troops entirely from Palestine. The official Jewish leadership institutions in Palestine, the Jewish Agency and Jewish National Council ("Vaad Leumi"), backed up by their military arm, the Haganah, had refrained from directly challenging British authority. They were convinced that the British would establish a Jewish state after the war due to support for the Zionist cause among both the Conservative and Labour parties. Giving as reasons that the British had reneged on the promises given in the Balfour Declaration and that the White Paper of 1939 restricting Jewish immigration was an escalation of their pro-Arab policy, he decided to break with the official institutions and launch an armed rebellion against British rule, in cooperation with Lehi, another breakaway Zionist group.secondnameplaceholder had studied the Irish War of Independence and the Indian independence movement, and, while planning the rebellion with Irgun commanders, devised a strategy of leverage he believed would force the British out. He proposed a series of guerrilla attacks that would humiliate the British and damage their prestige, which would force them to resort to repressive measures, which would in turn alienate the Yishuv. secondnameplaceholder banked on the international media being attracted to the action, which he referred to as turning Palestine into a "glass house", with the world looking in. This would draw international attention, and British repression would create global sympathy for the Irgun's cause, which in turn would translate into political pressure on Britain. Ultimately, the British would be forced to choose between continued repression or withdrawal, and secondnameplaceholder was certain that in the end, the British would leave. Furthermore, so as not to disturb the war effort against Germany, only British government and police targets would be attacked at first, while military targets would only be attacked once Germany had been defeated.[19]On 1 February 1944, the Irgun proclaimed a revolt. Twelve days later, it put its plan into action when Irgun teams bombed the empty offices of the British Mandate's Immigration Department in Jerusalem, Tel Aviv, and Haifa. The Irgun next bombed the Income Tax Offices in those three cities, followed by a series of attacks on police stations in which two Irgun fighters and six policemen were killed. Meanwhile, Lehi joined the revolt with a series of shooting attacks on policemen.[19]The Irgun and Lehi attacks intensified throughout 1944. These operations were financed by demanding money from Jewish merchants and engaging in insurance scams in the local diamond industry.[20]In 1944, after Lehi gunmen assassinated Lord Moyne, the British Resident Minister in the Middle East, the official Jewish authorities, fearing British retaliation, ordered the Haganah to undertake a campaign of collaboration with the British. Known as The Hunting Season, the campaign seriously crippled the Irgun for several months, while Lehi, having agreed to suspend their anti-British attacks, was spared. secondnameplaceholder, anxious to prevent a civil war, ordered his men not to retaliate or resist being taken captive, convinced that the Irgun could ride out the Season, and that the Jewish Agency would eventually side with the Irgun when it became apparent the British government had no intention of making concessions. Gradually, shamed at participating in what was viewed as a collaborationist campaign, the enthusiasm of the Haganah began to wane, and secondnameplaceholder's assumptions were proven correct. The Irgun's restraint also earned it much sympathy from the Yishuv, whereas previously it had been assumed by many that it had placed its own political interests before those of the Yishuv.[19]In the summer of 1945, as it became clear that the British were not planning on establishing a Jewish state and would not allow significant Jewish immigration to Palestine, Jewish public opinion shifted decisively against the British, and the Jewish authorities sent feelers to the Irgun and Lehi to discuss an alliance. The end result was the Jewish Resistance Movement, a framework under which the Haganah, Irgun, and Lehi launched coordinated series of anti-British operations. For several months in 1945–46, the Irgun fought as part of the Jewish Resistance Movement. Following Operation Agatha, during which the British arrested many Jews, seized arms caches, and occupied the Jewish Agency building, from which many documents were removed, secondnameplaceholder ordered an attack on the British military and administrative headquarters at the King David Hotel following a request from the Haganah, although the Haganah's permission was later rescinded. The King David Hotel bombing resulted in the destruction of the building's southern wing, and 91 people, mostly British, Arabs, and Jews, were killed.The fragile partnership collapsed following the bombing, partly because contrary to instructions, it was carried out during the busiest part of the day at the hotel. The Haganah, from then on, would rarely mount attacks against British forces and would focus mainly on the Aliyah Bet illegal immigration campaign, and while it occasionally took half-hearted measures against the Irgun, it never returned to full-scale collaboration with the British. The Irgun and Lehi continued waging a full-scale insurgency against the British, and together with the Haganah's illegal immigration campaign, this forced a large commitment of British forces to Palestine that was gradually sapping British financial resources. Three particular Irgun operations directly ordered by secondnameplaceholder: the Night of the Beatings, the Acre Prison break, and the Sergeants affair, were cited as particularly influencing the British to leave due to the great loss of British prestige and growing public opposition to Britain remaining in Palestine at home they generated. In September 1947, the British cabinet voted to leave Palestine, and in November of that year, the United Nations approved a resolution to partition the country between Arabs and Jews. The financial burden imposed on Britain by the Jewish insurgency, together with the tremendous public opposition to keeping troops in Palestine it generated among the British public was later cited by British officials as a major factor in Britain's decision to evacuate Palestine.[21][22]In December 1947, immediately following the UN partition vote, the 1947–1948 Civil War in Mandatory Palestine broke out between the Yishuv and Palestinian Arabs. The Irgun fought together with the Haganah and Lehi during that period. Notable operations in which they took part were the battle of Jaffa and the Jordanian siege on the Jewish Quarter in the Old City of Jerusalem. The Irgun's most controversial operation during this period, carried out alongside Lehi, was an assault on the Arab village of Deir Yassin in which more than a hundred villagers and four of the attackers were killed. The event later became known as the Deir Yassin massacre, though Irgun and Lehi sources would deny a massacre took place there. secondnameplaceholder also repeatedly threatened to declare independence if the Jewish Agency did not do so.[19]Throughout the period of the rebellion against the British and the civil war against the Arabs, secondnameplaceholder lived openly under a series of assumed names, often while sporting a beard. secondnameplaceholder would not come out of hiding until April 1948, when the British, who still maintained nominal authority over Palestine, were almost totally gone. During the period of revolt, secondnameplaceholder was the most wanted man in Palestine, and MI5 placed a 'dead-or-alive' bounty of £10,000 on his head. secondnameplaceholder had been forced into hiding immediately prior to the declaration of revolt, when Aliza noticed that their house was being watched. He initially lived in a room in the Savoy Hotel, a small hotel in Tel Aviv whose owner was sympathetic to the Irgun's cause, and his wife and son were smuggled in to join him after two months. He decided to grow a beard and live openly under an assumed name rather than go completely into hiding. He was aided by the fact that the British authorities possessed only two photographs of his likeness, of which one, which they believed to be his military identity card, bore only a slight resemblance to him, according to secondnameplaceholder, and were fed misinformation by Yaakov Meridor that he had had plastic surgery, and were thus confused over his appearance. Due to the British police conducting searches in the hotel's vicinity, he relocated to a Yemenite neighborhood in Petah Tikva, and after a month, moved to the Hasidof neighborhood near Kfar Sirkin, where he pretended to be a lawyer named Yisrael Halperin. After the British searched the area but missed the street where his house was located, secondnameplaceholder and his family moved to a new home on a Tel Aviv side street, where he assumed the name Yisrael Sassover and masqueraded as a rabbi. Following the King David Hotel bombing, when the British searched the entire city of Tel Aviv, secondnameplaceholder evaded capture by hiding in a secret compartment in his home.[19] In 1947, he moved to the heart of Tel Aviv and took the identity of Dr. Yonah Koenigshoffer, the name he found on an abandoned passport in a library.In the years following the establishment of the State of Israel, the Irgun's contribution to precipitating British withdrawal became a hotly contested debate as different factions vied for control over the emerging narrative of Israeli independence.[23] secondnameplaceholder resented his being portrayed as a belligerent dissident.[24]After the Israeli Declaration of Independence on 14 May 1948 and the start of the 1948 Arab–Israeli War, Irgun continued to fight alongside Haganah and Lehi. On 15 May 1948, secondnameplaceholder broadcast a speech on radio declaring that the Irgun was finally moving out of its underground status.[25] On 1 June secondnameplaceholder signed an agreement with the provisional government headed by David Ben-Gurion, where the Irgun agreed to formally disband and to integrate its force with the newly formed Israel Defense Forces (IDF),[citation needed] but was not truthful of the armaments aboard the Altalena as it was scheduled to arrive during the cease-fire ordered by the United Nations and therefore would have put the State of Israel in peril as Britain was adamant the partition of Jewish and Arab Palestine would not occur.  This delivery was the smoking gun Britain would need to urge the UN to end the partition action.Intense negotiations between representatives of the provisional government (headed by Ben-Gurion) and the Irgun (headed by secondnameplaceholder) followed the departure of Altalena from France. Among the issues discussed were logistics of the ship's landing and distribution of the cargo between the military organizations. Whilst there was agreement on the anchoring place of the Altalena, there were differences of opinion about the allocation of the cargo. Ben-Gurion agreed to secondnameplaceholder's initial request that 20% of the weapons be dispatched to the Irgun's Jerusalem Battalion, which was still fighting independently. His second request, however, that the remainder be transferred to the IDF to equip the newly incorporated Irgun battalions, was rejected by the Government representatives, who interpreted the request as a demand to reinforce an "army within an army."The Altalena reached Kfar Vitkin in the late afternoon of Sunday, 20 June. Among the Irgun members waiting on the shore was firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, who greeted the arrivals with great emotion. After the passengers had disembarked, members of the fishing village of Mikhmoret helped unload the cargo of military equipment. Concomitantly with the events at Kfar Vitkin, the government had convened in Tel Aviv for its weekly meeting. Ben-Gurion reported on the meetings which had preceded the arrival of the Altalena, and was adamant in his demand that secondnameplaceholder surrender and hand over all of the weapons:The debate ended in a resolution to empower the army to use force if necessary to overcome the Irgun and to confiscate the ship and its cargo. Implementation of this decision was assigned to the Alexandroni Brigade, commanded by Dan Even (Epstein), which the following day surrounded the Kfar Vitkin area. Dan Even issued the following ultimatum:The ultimatum was made, according to Even, "in order not to give the Irgun commander time for lengthy considerations and to gain the advantage of surprise." secondnameplaceholder refused to respond to the ultimatum, and all attempts at mediation failed. secondnameplaceholder's failure to respond was a blow to Even's prestige, and a clash was now inevitable. Fighting ensued and there were a number of casualties. In order to prevent further bloodshed, the Kfar Vitkin settlers initiated negotiations between Yaakov Meridor (secondnameplaceholder's deputy) and Dan Even, which ended in a general ceasefire and the transfer of the weapons on shore to the local IDF commander.secondnameplaceholder had meanwhile boarded the Altalena, which was headed for Tel Aviv where the Irgun had more supporters. Many Irgun members, who joined the IDF earlier that month, left their bases and concentrated on the Tel Aviv beach. A confrontation between them and the IDF units started.  In response, Ben-Gurion ordered Yigael Yadin (acting Chief of Staff) to concentrate large forces on the Tel Aviv beach and to take the ship by force. Heavy guns were transferred to the area and at four in the afternoon, Ben-Gurion ordered the shelling of the Altalena. One of the shells hit the ship, which began to burn. Yigal Allon, commander of the troops on the shore, later claimed only five or six shells were fired, as warning shots, and the ship was hit by accident.[26]There was danger that the fire would spread to the holds which contained explosives, and Captain Monroe Fein ordered all aboard to abandon ship. People jumped into the water, whilst their comrades on shore set out to meet them on rafts. Although Captain Fein flew the white flag of surrender, automatic fire continued to be directed at the unarmed survivors swimming in the water.[citation needed] secondnameplaceholder, who was on deck, agreed to leave the ship only after the last of the wounded had been evacuated. Sixteen Irgun fighters were killed in the confrontation with the army (all but three were veteran members and not newcomers in the ship); six were killed in the Kfar Vitkin area and ten on Tel Aviv beach. Three IDF soldiers were killed: two at Kfar Vitkin and one in Tel Aviv.[27][28][29]After the shelling of the Altalena, more than 200 Irgun fighters were arrested. Most of them were released several weeks later, with the exception of five senior commanders (Moshe Hason, Eliyahu Lankin, Yaakov Meridor, Bezalel Amitzur, and Hillel Kook), who were detained for more than two months, until 27 August 1948. secondnameplaceholder agreed the Irgun soldiers would be fully integrated with the IDF and not kept in separate units.About a year later, Altalena was refloated, towed 15 miles out to sea and sunk.[30]
<h2>Political career</h2>
In August 1948, secondnameplaceholder and members of the Irgun High Command emerged from the underground and formed the right-wing political party Herut ("Freedom") party.[31] The move countered the weakening attraction for the earlier revisionist party, Hatzohar, founded by his late mentor Ze'ev Jabotinsky. Revisionist 'purists' alleged nonetheless that secondnameplaceholder was out to steal Jabotinsky's mantle and ran against him with the old party. The Herut party can be seen as the forerunner of today's Likud.In November 1948, secondnameplaceholder visited the US on a campaigning trip. During his visit, a letter signed by Albert Einstein, Sidney Hook, Hannah Arendt, and other prominent Americans and several rabbis was published which described secondnameplaceholder's Herut party as "terrorist, right-wing chauvinist organization in Palestine,"[32] "closely akin in its organization, methods, political philosophy and social appeal to the Nazi and Fascist parties" and accused his group (along with the smaller, militant, Stern Gang) of preaching "racial superiority" and having "inaugurated a reign of terror in the Palestine Jewish community".[33][34]In the first elections in 1949, Herut, with 11.5 percent of the vote, won 14 seats, while Hatzohar failed to break the threshold and disbanded shortly thereafter. This provided secondnameplaceholder with legitimacy as the leader of the Revisionist stream of Zionism. During the 1950s secondnameplaceholder was banned from entering the United Kingdom, as the British government regarded him as "leader of the notorious terrorist organisation Irgun"[35]Between 1948 and 1977, under secondnameplaceholder, Herut and the alliances it formed (Gahal in 1965 and Likud in 1973) formed the main opposition to the dominant Mapai and later the Alignment (the forerunners of today's Labor Party) in the Knesset; Herut adopted a radical nationalistic agenda committed to the irredentist idea of Greater Israel that usually included Jordan.[36] During those years, secondnameplaceholder was systematically delegitimized by the ruling party, and was often personally derided by Ben-Gurion who refused to either speak to or refer to him by name. Ben-Gurion famously coined the phrase 'without Herut and Maki' (Maki was the communist party), referring to his refusal to consider them for coalition, effectively pushing both parties and their voters beyond the margins of political consensus.The personal animosity between Ben-Gurion and secondnameplaceholder, going back to the hostilities over the Altalena Affair, underpinned the political dichotomy between Mapai and Herut. secondnameplaceholder was a keen critic of Mapai, accusing it of coercive Bolshevism and deep-rooted institutional corruption. Drawing on his training as a lawyer in Poland, he preferred wearing a formal suit and tie and evincing the dry demeanor of a legislator to the socialist informality of Mapai, as a means of accentuating their differences.One of the fiercest confrontations between secondnameplaceholder and Ben-Gurion revolved around the Reparations Agreement between Israel and West Germany, signed in 1952. secondnameplaceholder vehemently opposed the agreement, claiming that it was tantamount to a pardon of Nazi crimes against the Jewish people.[37] While the agreement was debated in the Knesset in January 1952, he led a demonstration in Jerusalem attended by some 15,000 people, and gave a passionate and dramatic speech in which he attacked the government and called for its violent overthrow. Referring to the Altalena Affair, secondnameplaceholder stated that "when you fired at me with cannon, I gave the order; 'Don't [return fire]!' Today I will give the order, 'Do!'"[38] Incited by his speech, the crowd marched towards the Knesset (then at the Frumin Building on King George Street) and threw stones at the windows, and at police as they intervened. After five hours of rioting, police managed to suppress the riots using water cannons and tear gas. Hundreds were arrested, while some 200 rioters, 140 police officers, and several Knesset members were injured. Many held secondnameplaceholder personally responsible for the violence, and he was consequently barred from the Knesset for several months. His behavior was strongly condemned in mainstream public discourse, reinforcing his image as a provocateur. The vehemence of Revisionist opposition was deep; in March 1952, during the ongoing reparations negotiations, a parcel bomb addressed to Konrad Adenauer, the sitting West German Chancellor, was intercepted at a German post office. While being defused, the bomb exploded, killing one sapper and injuring two others. Five Israelis, all former members of Irgun, were later arrested in Paris for their involvement in the plot. Chancellor Adenauer decided to keep secret the involvement of Israeli opposition party members in the plot, thus avoiding Israeli embarrassment and a likely backlash. The five Irgun conspirators were later extradited from both France and Germany, without charge, and sent back to Israel. Forty years after the assassination attempt, secondnameplaceholder was implicated as the organizer of the assassination attempt in a memoir written by one of the conspirators, Elieser Sudit.[39][40][41][42]secondnameplaceholder's impassioned rhetoric, laden with pathos and evocations of the Holocaust, appealed to many, but was deemed inflammatory and demagoguery by others.In the following years, secondnameplaceholder failed to gain electoral momentum, and Herut remained far behind Labor with a total of 17 seats until 1961. In 1965, Herut and the Liberal Party united to form the Gahal party under secondnameplaceholder's leadership, but failed again to win more seats in the election that year. In 1966, during Herut's party convention, he was challenged by the young Ehud Olmert, who called for his resignation. secondnameplaceholder announced that he would retire from party leadership, but soon reversed his decision when the crowd pleaded with him to stay. The day the Six-Day War started in June 1967, Gahal joined the national unity government under Prime Minister Levi Eshkol of the Alignment, resulting in secondnameplaceholder serving in the cabinet for the first time, as a Minister without Portfolio. Rafi also joined the unity government at that time, with Moshe Dayan becoming Defense Minister. Gahal's arrangement lasted until August 1970, when secondnameplaceholder and Gahal quit the government, then led by Golda Meir due to disagreements over the Rogers Plan and its "in place" cease-fire with Egypt along the Suez Canal,[43] Other sources, including William B. Quandt, note that the Labor party, by formally accepting UN 242 in mid-1970, had accepted "peace for withdrawal" on all fronts, and because of this secondnameplaceholder had left the unity government. On 5 August, secondnameplaceholder explained before the Knesset why he was resigning from the cabinet. He said, "As far as we are concerned, what do the words 'withdrawal from territories administered since 1967 by Israel' mean other than Judea and Samaria. Not all the territories; but by all opinion, most of them."[44]In 1973, secondnameplaceholder agreed to a plan by Ariel Sharon to form a larger bloc of opposition parties, made up from Gahal, the Free Centre, and other smaller groups. They came through with a tenuous alliance called the Likud ("Consolidation"). In the elections held later that year, two months after the Yom Kippur War, the Likud won a considerable share of the votes, though with 39 seats still remained in opposition.Yet the aftermath of the Yom Kippur War saw ensuing public disenchantment with the Alignment. Voices of criticism about the government's misconduct of the war gave rise to growing public resentment. Personifying the antithesis to the Alignment's socialist ethos, secondnameplaceholder appealed to many Mizrahi Israelis, mostly first and second generation Jewish refugees from Arab countries, who felt they were continuously being treated by the establishment as second-class citizens. His open embrace of Judaism stood in stark contrast to the Alignment's secularism, which alienated Mizrahi voters and drew many of them to support secondnameplaceholder, becoming his burgeoning political base. In the years 1974–77 Yitzhak Rabin's government suffered from instability due to infighting within the labor party (Rabin and Shimon Peres) and the shift to the right by the National Religious Party, as well as numerous corruption scandals. All these weakened the labor camp and finally allowed secondnameplaceholder to capture the center stage of Israeli politics.
<h2>Prime Minister of Israel</h2>
On 17 May 1977 the Likud, headed by secondnameplaceholder, won the Knesset elections by a landslide, becoming the biggest party in the Knesset. Popularly known as the Mahapakh ("upheaval"), the election results had seismic ramifications as for the first time in Israeli history a party other than the Alignment/Mapai was in a position to form a government, effectively ending the left's hitherto unrivalled domination over Israeli politics. Likud's electoral victory signified a fundamental restructuring of Israeli society in which the founding socialist Ashkenazi elite was being replaced by a coalition representing marginalized Mizrahi and Jewish-religious communities, promoting a socially conservative and economically liberal agenda.The Likud campaign leading up to the election centered on secondnameplaceholder's personality. Demonized by the Alignment as totalitarian and extremist, his self-portrayal as a humble and pious leader struck a chord with many who felt abandoned by the ruling party's ideology. In the predominantly Jewish Mizrahi working class urban neighborhoods and peripheral towns, the Likud won overwhelming majorities, while disillusionment with the Alignment's corruption prompted many middle and upper class voters to support the newly founded centrist Democratic Movement for Change ("Dash") headed by Yigael Yadin. Dash won 15 seats out of 120, largely at the expense of the Alignment, which was led by Shimon Peres and had shrunk from 51 to 32 seats. Well aware of his momentous achievement and employing his trademark sense for drama, when speaking that night in the Likud headquarters secondnameplaceholder quoted from the Gettysburg Address and the Torah, referring to his victory as a 'turning point in the history of the Jewish people'.With 43 seats, the Likud still required the support of other parties in order to reach a parliamentary majority that would enable it to form a government under Israel's proportionate representation parliamentary system. Though able to form a narrow coalition with smaller Jewish religious and ultra-orthodox parties, secondnameplaceholder also sought support from centrist elements in the Knesset to provide his government with greater public legitimacy. He controversially offered the foreign affairs portfolio to Moshe Dayan, a former IDF Chief of Staff and Defense Minister, and a prominent Alignment politician identified with the old establishment. secondnameplaceholder was sworn in as Prime Minister of Israel on 20 June 1977. Dash eventually joined his government several months later, thus providing it with the broad support of almost two thirds of the Knesset. While Prime Minister, Yehuda Avner served as secondnameplaceholder's speech writer.As Prime Minister, secondnameplaceholder presided over various reforms in the domestic field. Tuition fees for secondary education were eliminated and compulsory education was extended to the tenth grade,[45] while new social programmes were introduced such as long-term care insurance[46] and a national income support system.[47] A ban on color television that had been imposed to enforce social equality was abolished, and the minimum age for a driver's license was lowered to 17.[48] Another government program initiated, named "Project Renewal", was aimed at rehabilitating impoverished towns and neighborhoods. Inhabited mainly by Sephardi and Mizrahi immigrants and their descendants, these areas were characterized by slum conditions and substandard housing. The project was a joint effort between the Israeli government, Jewish Agency, and Jewish communities worldwide, which provided much of the funding for it. The program was directly administered through the Prime Minister's Office until 1981, when secondnameplaceholder's government transferred responsibility to the Ministry of Housing.Extensive work was done to eliminate slum conditions in these areas, and to improve the general quality of life. Physical infrastructure such as roads, sewage and drainage systems, and street lighting was upgraded, tens of thousands of housing units were renovated and expanded, and hundreds of public service facilities such as community centers, early childhood development centers, day centers for the elderly, playgrounds, and educational and healthcare facilities were built or renovated. By 1983, the program had touched over 450,000 people in 82 towns and neighborhoods. The program continued past secondnameplaceholder's premiership, and switched towards other vulnerable populations. Project Renewal is still being implemented today for at-risk communities in Israel.[49]secondnameplaceholder's economic policies sought to liberalize Israel's socialist economy towards a more free-market approach, and he appointed Simha Erlich as Finance Minister. Erlich unveiled a new economic policy that became known as the "economic transformation". Under the new plan, the exchange rate would from then on be determined by market forces rather than the government, subsidies for many consumer products were cancelled, foreign exchange controls were eased, the VAT tax was raised while the travel tax was cancelled, and customs duties were lowered to encourage imports of more products. The plan generated some improvement; cheap and high-quality imported products began to fill consumer shelves, the business sector benefited greatly, and the stock market recorded rising share prices. However, the program did not improve the lives of the Israeli people as secondnameplaceholder had hoped. The combination of the increased VAT, the end of subsidies, and a rise in the U.S. dollar exchange rate set off a wave of inflation and price increases. In particular, the fact that government spending was not significantly reduced in tandem with the liberalization program triggered a massive bout of inflation. On 17 July 1978, the Israeli cabinet met to discuss rising inflation, but secondnameplaceholder, declaring that "you cannot manage economics over the housewife's back", halted all proposals. In the end, the government decided not to take any actions and allow inflation to ride its course. secondnameplaceholder and his other ministers did not internalize the full meaning of the liberalization plan. As a result, he blocked attempts by Erlich to lower government spending and government plans to privatize public-sector enterprises out of fear of harming the weaker sectors of society, allowing the privatization of only eighteen government companies during his six-year tenure.[48][50] In 1983, shortly before secondnameplaceholder's resignation, a major financial crisis hit Israel after the stocks of the country's four largest banks collapsed and were subsequently nationalized by the state. Inflation would continue rapidly rising past secondnameplaceholder's tenure, and was only brought under control after the 1985 Israel Economic Stabilization Plan, which among other things greatly curbed government spending, was introduced. The years of rampant inflation devastated the economic power of the powerful Histadrut labor federation and the kibbutzim, which would help Israel's approach towards a free-market economy.[48]secondnameplaceholder's government has been credited with starting a trend that would move Israel towards a capitalist economy that would see the rise of a consumer culture and a pursuit of wealth and higher living standards, replacing a culture that scorned capitalism and valued social, as well as government restrictions to enforce equality.[48]In terms of social justice, however, the legacy of the secondnameplaceholder Government was arguably a questionable one. In 1980, the state Social Security Institute estimated that from 1977 to 1980 the number of babies born in poverty doubled, while there had been a 300% increase in the number of families with four to five children below the poverty line. Additionally, the number of families with more than five children below the poverty line went up by 400,% while child poverty estimates suggested that from 1977 to 1981 the number of children living below the poverty line had risen from 3.8% to 8.4%,[51] while officials at the National Institute of Insurance estimated that the incidence of poverty had doubled during secondnameplaceholder's five years in office.[52]In 1978 secondnameplaceholder, aided by Foreign Minister Moshe Dayan and Defense Minister Ezer Weizman, came to Washington and Camp David to negotiate the Camp David Accords, leading to the 1979 Egypt–Israel Peace Treaty with Egyptian President, Anwar Sadat. Before going to Washington to meet President Carter, secondnameplaceholder visited Rabbi firstnameplaceholder M. Schneerson for his advice.[53] Under the terms of the treaty, brokered by US President, Jimmy Carter, Israel was to hand over the Sinai Peninsula in its entirety to Egypt. The peace treaty with Egypt was a watershed moment in Middle Eastern history, as it was the first time an Arab state recognized Israel's legitimacy whereas Israel effectively accepted the land for peace principle as blueprint for resolving the Arab–Israeli conflict. Given Egypt's prominent position within the Arab World, especially as Israel's biggest and most powerful enemy, the treaty had far reaching strategic and geopolitical implications.Almost overnight, secondnameplaceholder's public image of an irresponsible nationalist radical was transformed into that of a statesman of historic proportions. This image was reinforced by international recognition which culminated with him being awarded, together with Sadat, the Nobel Peace Prize in 1978.Yet while establishing secondnameplaceholder as a leader with broad public appeal, the peace treaty with Egypt was met with fierce criticism within his own Likud party. His devout followers found it difficult to reconcile secondnameplaceholder's history as a keen promoter of the Greater Israel agenda with his willingness to relinquish occupied territory. Agreeing to the removal of Israeli settlements from the Sinai was perceived by many as a clear departure from Likud's Revisionist ideology. Several prominent Likud members, most notably Yitzhak Shamir, objected to the treaty and abstained when it was ratified with an overwhelming majority in the Knesset, achieved only thanks to support from the opposition. A small group of hardliners within Likud, associated with Gush Emunim Jewish settlement movement, eventually decided to split and form the Tehiya party in 1979. They led the Movement for Stopping the Withdrawal from Sinai, violently clashing with IDF soldiers during the forceful eviction of Yamit settlement in April 1982. Despite the traumatic scenes from Yamit, political support for the treaty did not diminish and the Sinai was handed over to Egypt in 1982.secondnameplaceholder was less resolute in implementing the section of the Camp David Accord calling for Palestinian self-rule in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. He appointed Agriculture Minister Ariel Sharon to implement a large scale expansion of Jewish settlements in the Israeli-occupied territories, a policy intended to make future territorial concessions in these areas effectively impossible.[citation needed] secondnameplaceholder refocused Israeli settlement strategy from populating peripheral areas in accordance with the Allon Plan, to building Jewish settlements in areas of Biblical and historic significance. When the settlement of Elon Moreh was established on the outskirts of Nablus in 1979, following years of campaigning by Gush Emunim, secondnameplaceholder declared that there are "many more Elon Morehs to come." During his term dozens of new settlements were built, and Jewish population in the West Bank and Gaza more than quadrupled.secondnameplaceholder took Saddam Hussein's anti-Zionist threats seriously and therefore took aim at Iraq, which was building a nuclear reactor named Osirak or Tammuz 1 with French and Italian assistance. When secondnameplaceholder took office, preparations were intensified. secondnameplaceholder authorized the construction of a full-scale model of the Iraqi reactor which Israeli pilots could practice bombing.[54] Israel attempted to negotiate with France and Italy to cut off assistance and with the United States to obtain assurances that the program would be halted. The negotiations failed. secondnameplaceholder considered the diplomatic option fruitless, and worried that prolonging the attack would lead to a fatal inability to act in response to the perceived threat.The decision to attack was hotly contested within secondnameplaceholder's government.[55] However, in October 1980, the Mossad informed secondnameplaceholder that the reactor would be fueled and operational by June 1981. This assessment was aided by reconnaissance photos supplied by the United States, and the Israeli cabinet voted to approve an attack.[56] In June 1981, secondnameplaceholder ordered the destruction of the reactor. On 7 June 1981, the Israeli Air Force destroyed the reactor in a successful long-range operation called Operation Opera.[57] Soon after, the government and secondnameplaceholder expounded on what came to be known as the secondnameplaceholder Doctrine: "On no account shall we permit an enemy to develop weapons of mass destruction (WMD) against the people of Israel." secondnameplaceholder explicitly stated the strike was not an anomaly, but instead called the event "a precedent for every future government in Israel"; it remains a feature of Israeli security planning policy.[58] Many foreign governments, including the United States, condemned the operation, and the United Nations Security Council unanimously passed Resolution 487 condemning it. The Israeli left-wing opposition criticized it also at the time, but mainly for its timing relative to domestic elections only three weeks later, when Likud was reelected.[59] The new government annexed the Golan Heights and banned the national airline from flying on Shabbat.[60]On 6 June 1982, secondnameplaceholder's government authorized the Israel Defense Forces invasion of Lebanon, in response to the attempted assassination of the Israeli ambassador to the United Kingdom, Shlomo Argov. The objective of Operation Peace for Galilee was to force the PLO out of rocket range of Israel's northern border. secondnameplaceholder was hoping for a short and limited Israeli involvement that would destroy the PLO's political and military infrastructure in southern Lebanon, effectively reshaping the balance of Lebanese power in favor of the Christian Militias who were allied with Israel. Nevertheless, fighting soon escalated into war with Palestinian and Lebanese militias, as well as the Syrian military, and the IDF progressed as far as Beirut, well beyond the 40 km limit initially authorized by the government. Israeli forces were successful in driving the PLO out of Lebanon and forcing its leadership to relocate to Tunisia, but the war ultimately failed to achieve its political goals of bringing security to Israel's northern border and creating stability in Lebanon. secondnameplaceholder referred to the invasion as an inevitable act of survival, often comparing Yasser Arafat to Hitler.Public dissatisfaction reached a peak in September 1982, after the Sabra and Shatila Massacre. Hundreds of thousands gathered in Tel Aviv in what was one of the biggest public demonstrations in Israeli history. The Kahan Commission, appointed to investigate the events, issued its report on 9 February 1983, found the government indirectly responsible for the massacre but that Defense Minister Ariel Sharon "bears personal responsibility." The commission recommended that Sharon be removed from office and never serve in any future Israeli government. Initially, Sharon attempted to remain in office and secondnameplaceholder refused to fire him. But Sharon resigned as Defense Minister after the death of Emil Grunzweig, who was killed by a grenade tossed into a crowd of demonstrators leaving a Peace Now organized march, which also injured ten others, including the son of an Israeli cabinet minister. Sharon remained in the cabinet as a minister without portfolio. Public pressure on secondnameplaceholder to resign increased.[61]secondnameplaceholder's disoriented appearance on national television while visiting the Beaufort battle site raised concerns that he was being misinformed about the war's progress. Asking Sharon whether PLO fighters had ‘machine guns’, secondnameplaceholder seemed out of touch with the nature and scale of the military campaign he had authorized. Almost a decade later, Haaretz reporter Uzi Benziman published a series of articles accusing Sharon of intentionally deceiving secondnameplaceholder about the operation's initial objectives, and continuously misleading him as the war progressed. Sharon sued both the newspaper and Benziman for libel in 1991. The trial lasted 11 years, with one of the highlights being the deposition of secondnameplaceholder's son, Benny, in favor of the defendants. Sharon lost the case.[62]After secondnameplaceholder's wife Aliza died in November 1982 while he was away on an official visit to Washington DC, he was thrown into a deep depression. secondnameplaceholder also became disappointed by the war in Lebanon because he had hoped to sign a peace treaty with the government President Bashir Gemayel, who was assassinated. Instead, there were mounting Israeli casualties, and protesters outside his office maintained a constant vigil with a sign showing the number of Israeli soldiers killed in Lebanon, which was constantly updated. secondnameplaceholder also continued to be plagued by the ill health and occasional hospitalizations that he had endured for years. In August 1983, he resigned, telling his colleagues that "I cannot go on any longer", and handed over the reins of the office of Prime Minister to his old comrade-in-arms Yitzhak Shamir, who had been the leader of the Lehi resistance to the British.
<h2>Tertiated</h2>
secondnameplaceholder, in his first meeting with President Carter, used the word tertiated to describe how, during the Holocaust one in three Jews, of the worldwide Jewish population, were murdered.[63]  When Carter asked "What was that word, Mr. Prime Minister?" secondnameplaceholder compared it to Decimation (Roman army) and then added "one in three - tertiated!"[64] secondnameplaceholder mentioned that he had used the word in a book he wrote.[65]secondnameplaceholder elaborated later on: "When I use the word "Tertiated" I mean to say that we do not accept the known term of "Decimation".[66] Avi Weiss highlighted: "But the Holocaust is different" and noted "As firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder once said, during the Holocaust our people were not decimated, but "tertiated" — it was not one in ten, but one in three that were murdered."[67]
<h2>Retirement and seclusion</h2>
secondnameplaceholder subsequently retired to an apartment overlooking the Jerusalem Forest and spent the rest of his life in seclusion. He would rarely leave his apartment, and then usually to visit his wife's grave-site to say the traditional Kaddish prayer for the departed. His seclusion was watched over by his children and his lifetime personal secretary Yechiel Kadishai, who monitored all official requests for meetings. secondnameplaceholder would meet almost no one other than close friends or family. After a year, he changed his telephone number due to journalists constantly calling him. He was cared for by his daughter Leah and a housekeeper. According to Kadishai, secondnameplaceholder spent most of his days reading and watching movies, and would start and finish a book almost every day. He also kept up with world events by continuing his lifelong habit of listening to the BBC every morning, which had begun during his underground days, and maintaining a subscription to several newspapers. secondnameplaceholder retained some political influence in the Likud party, which he used to influence it behind the scenes.[68][69][70]In 1990, secondnameplaceholder broke his hip in a fall and underwent surgery at Shaare Zedek Medical Center. Afterwards, doctors recommended moving him to Ichilov Hospital at the Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center for rehabilitation. He was released from hospital in March 1991 and subsequently moved to an apartment in the Afeka neighborhood in Tel Aviv. The hospital stay and permanent move to Tel Aviv greatly improved his health and mood and his seclusion somewhat loosened. On Passover eve in 1991, he gave a telephone interview as part of a television broadcast marking fifty years since the death of Ze'ev Jabotinsky. He gave another telephone interview, which would be the last interview of his life, in July 1991.[71]
<h2>Death</h2>
On 3 March 1992, secondnameplaceholder suffered a severe heart attack in his apartment, and was rushed to Ichilov Hospital, where he was put in the intensive care unit. secondnameplaceholder arrived there unconscious and paralyzed on the left side of his body. His condition slightly improved following treatment, and he regained consciousness after 20 hours. For the next six days, secondnameplaceholder remained in serious condition. A pacemaker was implanted in his chest to stabilize his heartbeat on 5 March.[72] secondnameplaceholder was too frail to overcome the effects of the heart attack, and his condition began to rapidly deteriorate on 9 March at about 3:15 AM. An emergency team of doctors and nurses attempted to resuscitate his failing heart. His children were notified of his condition and immediately rushed to his side. secondnameplaceholder died at 3:30 AM. His death was announced an hour and a half later. Shortly before 6:00 AM, the hospital rabbi arrived at his bedside to say the Kaddish prayer.[73][74]secondnameplaceholder's funeral took place in Jerusalem that afternoon. His coffin was carried four kilometers from the Sanhedria Funeral Parlor to Mount of Olives in a funeral procession attended by thousands of people.[75] In accordance with his wishes, secondnameplaceholder was given a simple Jewish burial ceremony rather than a state funeral and buried on the Mount of Olives in the Jewish Cemetery there. He had asked to be buried there instead of Mount Herzl, where most Israeli leaders are laid to rest, because he wanted to be buried beside his wife Aliza, as well as Meir Feinstein of Irgun and Moshe Barazani of Lehi, who committed suicide in jail while awaiting execution by the British.[76] An estimated 75,000 mourners were present at the funeral. Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir, President Chaim Herzog, all cabinet ministers present in Israel, Supreme Court justices, Knesset members from most parties and a number of foreign ambassadors attended the funeral. Former members of the Irgun High Command served as pallbearers.[77]A slightly fictionalized firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder appeared in the first edition of Land of Black Gold,[78] but was removed from subsequent editions.[79] He appears in the film Waltz with Bashir, the techno-thriller novel The Fifth Horseman by Larry Collins and Dominique Lapierre, and the science fiction novel Worldwar: Volume 4: Striking the Balance by Harry Turtledove.secondnameplaceholder was played by David Opatoshu in the 1977 TV film Raid on Entebbe and by Barry Morse in the 1983 miniseries Sadat.Chris Claremont, longtime writer of the X-Men comic book, has said that secondnameplaceholder reminds him of the character Magneto.[80]In "The Last Temptation of Homer", Bart Simpson is prescribed square, black-rimmed eyeglasses for his lazy eye, and the doctor tries to comfort him by saying that "firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder wore a pair just like them."A stage play, Mr. secondnameplaceholder, written by Gabriel Emanuel and starring actor Dani Shteg, opened at the Menahem secondnameplaceholder Heritage Center in Jerusalem in July 2013.
(!!)Article(!/!)
Mother Mary firstnameplaceholder Bojaxhiu[6] (born Anjezë Gonxhe Bojaxhiu, Albanian: [aˈɲɛzə ˈɡɔndʒɛ bɔjaˈdʒiu]; 26 August 1910 – 5 September 1997), honoured in the Catholic Church as Saint firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder,[7] was an Albanian-Indian[4] Roman Catholic nun and missionary.[8] She was born in Skopje (now the capital of North Macedonia), then part of the Kosovo Vilayet of the Ottoman Empire. After living in Skopje for eighteen years, she moved to Ireland and then to India, where she lived for most of her life.In 1950, firstnameplaceholder founded the Missionaries of Charity, a Roman Catholic religious congregation that had over 4,500 nuns and was active in 133 countries in 2012. The congregation manages homes for people who are dying of HIV/AIDS, leprosy and tuberculosis. It also runs soup kitchens, dispensaries, mobile clinics, children's and family counselling programmes, as well as orphanages and schools. Members take vows of chastity, poverty, and obedience, and also profess a fourth vow – to give "wholehearted free service to the poorest of the poor."[9]firstnameplaceholder received a number of honors, including the 1962 Ramon Magsaysay Peace Prize and the 1979 Nobel Peace Prize. She was canonised on 4 September 2016, and the anniversary of her death (5 September) is her feast day. A controversial figure during her life and after her death, firstnameplaceholder was admired by many for her charitable work. She was praised and criticized on various counts, such as for her views on abortion and contraception, and was criticized for poor conditions in her houses for the dying. Her authorized biography was written by Navin Chawla and published in 1992, and she has been the subject of films and other books. On 6 September 2017, firstnameplaceholder and St. Francis Xavier were named co-patrons of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese secondnameplaceholder.
<h2>Biography</h2>
firstnameplaceholder was born Anjezë Gonxhe (or Gonxha)[10][page needed] Bojaxhiu (Albanian: [aˈɲɛzə ˈɡɔndʒɛ bɔjaˈdʒiu]; Anjezë is a cognate of "Agnes"; Gonxhe means "rosebud" or "little flower" in Albanian) on 26 August 1910 into a Kosovar Albanian family[11][12][13] in Skopje, Ottoman Empire (now the capital of North Macedonia).[14][15] She was baptised in Skopje, the day after her birth.[10][page needed] She later considered 27 August, the day she was baptised, her "true birthday".[14]She was the youngest child of Nikollë and Dranafile Bojaxhiu (Bernai).[16] Her father, who was involved in Albanian-community politics in Ottoman Macedonia, died in 1919 when she was eight years old.[14][17] He was born in Prizren (today in Kosovo), however, his family was from Mirdita (present-day Albania).[18][19] Her mother may have been from a village near Gjakova.[20]According to a biography by Joan Graff Clucas, firstnameplaceholder was in her early years when she was fascinated by stories of the lives of missionaries and their service in Bengal; by age 12, she was convinced that she should commit herself to religious life.[21] Her resolve strengthened on 15 August 1928 as she prayed at the shrine of the Black Madonna of Vitina-Letnice, where she often went on pilgrimages.[22]firstnameplaceholder left home in 1928 at age 18 to join the Sisters of Loreto at Loreto Abbey in Rathfarnham, Ireland, to learn English with the intent of becoming a missionary; English was the language of instruction of the Sisters of Loreto in India.[23] She saw neither her mother nor her sister again.[24] Her family lived in Skopje until 1934, when they moved to Tirana.[25]She arrived in India in 1929[26] and began her novitiate in Darjeeling, in the lower Himalayas,[27] where she learned Bengali and taught at St. firstnameplaceholder's School near her convent.[28] firstnameplaceholder took her first religious vows on 24 May 1931. She chose to be named after Thérèse de Lisieux, the patron saint of missionaries;[29][30] because a nun in the convent had already chosen that name, she opted for its Spanish spelling (firstnameplaceholder).[31]firstnameplaceholder took her solemn vows on 14 May 1937 while she was a teacher at the Loreto convent school in Entally, eastern Calcutta.[14][32][33] She served there for nearly twenty years and was appointed its headmistress in 1944.[34] Although firstnameplaceholder enjoyed teaching at the school, she was increasingly disturbed by the poverty surrounding her in Calcutta.[35] The Bengal famine of 1943 brought misery and death to the city, and the August 1946 Direct Action Day began a period of Muslim-Hindu violence.[36]During this visit to Darjeeling by train, she heard the call of her inner conscience. She felt that she should serve the poor by staying with them. She asked for and received permission to leave the school. In 1950 she founded ‘Missionaries of Charity'. She went out to serve humanity with two saris with a blue border.[37]On 10 September 1946, firstnameplaceholder experienced what she later described as "the call within the call" when she traveled by train to the Loreto convent in Darjeeling from Calcutta for her annual retreat. "I was to leave the convent and help the poor while living among them. It was an order. To fail would have been to break the faith."[38] Joseph Langford later wrote, "Though no one knew it at the time, Sister firstnameplaceholder had just become Mother firstnameplaceholder".[39]She began missionary work with the poor in 1948,[26] replacing her traditional Loreto habit with a simple, white cotton sari with a blue border. firstnameplaceholder adopted Indian citizenship, spent several months in Patna to receive basic medical training at Holy Family Hospital and ventured into the slums.[40][41] She founded a school in Motijhil, Kolkata, before she began tending to the poor and hungry.[42] At the beginning of 1949 firstnameplaceholder was joined in her effort by a group of young women, and she laid the foundation for a new religious community helping the "poorest among the poor".[43]Her efforts quickly caught the attention of Indian officials, including the prime minister.[44] firstnameplaceholder wrote in her diary that her first year was fraught with difficulty. With no income, she begged for food and supplies and experienced doubt, loneliness and the temptation to return to the comfort of convent life during these early months:On 7 October 1950, firstnameplaceholder received Vatican permission for the diocesan congregation, which would become the Missionaries of Charity.[46] In her words, it would care for "the hungry, the naked, the homeless, the crippled, the blind, the lepers, all those people who feel unwanted, unloved, uncared for throughout society, people that have become a burden to the society and are shunned by everyone".[47]In 1952, firstnameplaceholder opened her first hospice with help from Calcutta officials. She converted an abandoned Hindu temple into the Kalighat Home for the Dying, free for the poor, and renamed it Kalighat, the Home of the Pure Heart (Nirmal Hriday).[48] Those brought to the home received medical attention and the opportunity to die with dignity in accordance with their faith: Muslims were read the Quran, Hindus received water from the Ganges, and Catholics received extreme unction.[49] "A beautiful death", firstnameplaceholder said, "is for people who lived like animals to die like angels—loved and wanted."[49]She opened a hospice for those with leprosy, calling it Shanti Nagar (City of Peace).[50] The Missionaries of Charity established leprosy-outreach clinics throughout Calcutta, providing medication, dressings and food.[51] The Missionaries of Charity took in an increasing number of homeless children; in 1955 firstnameplaceholder opened Nirmala Shishu Bhavan, the Children's Home of the Immaculate Heart, as a haven for orphans and homeless youth.[52]The congregation began to attract recruits and donations, and by the 1960s it had opened hospices, orphanages and leper houses throughout India. firstnameplaceholder then expanded the congregation abroad, opening a house in Venezuela in 1965 with five sisters.[53] Houses followed in Italy (Rome), Tanzania and Austria in 1968, and during the 1970s the congregation opened houses and foundations in the United States and dozens of countries in Asia, Africa and Europe.[54]The Missionaries of Charity Brothers was founded in 1963, and a contemplative branch of the Sisters followed in 1976. Lay Catholics and non-Catholics were enrolled in the Co-Workers of Mother firstnameplaceholder, the Sick and Suffering Co-Workers, and the Lay Missionaries of Charity. Responding to requests by many priests, in 1981 Mother firstnameplaceholder founded the Corpus Christi Movement for Priests[55] and with Joseph Langford the Missionaries of Charity Fathers in 1984, to combine the vocational aims of the Missionaries of Charity with the resources of the priesthood.[56]By 1997, the 13-member Calcutta congregation had grown to more than 4,000 sisters who managed orphanages, AIDS hospices and charity centers worldwide, caring for refugees, the blind, disabled, aged, alcoholics, the poor and homeless and victims of floods, epidemics and famine.[57] By 2007, the Missionaries of Charity numbered about 450 brothers and 5,000 sisters worldwide, operating 600 missions, schools and shelters in 120 countries.[58]firstnameplaceholder said, "By blood, I am Albanian. By citizenship, an Indian. By faith, I am a Catholic nun. As to my calling, I belong to the world. As to my heart, I belong entirely to the Heart of Jesus."[4] Fluent in five languages – Bengali,[59] Albanian, Serbian, English and Hindi – she made occasional trips outside India for humanitarian reasons.[60]At the height of the Siege of Beirut in 1982, firstnameplaceholder rescued 37 children trapped in a front-line hospital by brokering a temporary cease-fire between the Israeli army and Palestinian guerrillas.[61] Accompanied by Red Cross workers, she travelled through the war zone to the hospital to evacuate the young patients.[62]When Eastern Europe experienced increased openness in the late 1980s, firstnameplaceholder expanded her efforts to Communist countries which had rejected the Missionaries of Charity. She began dozens of projects, undeterred by criticism of her stands against abortion and divorce: "No matter who says what, you should accept it with a smile and do your own work." She visited Armenia after the 1988 earthquake[63] and met with Nikolai Ryzhkov, Chairman of the Council of Ministers.[64]firstnameplaceholder travelled to assist the hungry in Ethiopia, radiation victims at Chernobyl and earthquake victims in Armenia.[65][66][67] In 1991 she returned to Albania for the first time, opening a Missionaries of Charity Brothers home in Tirana.[68]By 1996, firstnameplaceholder operated 517 missions in over 100 countries.[69] Her Missionaries of Charity grew from twelve to thousands, serving the "poorest of the poor" in 450 centres worldwide. The first Missionaries of Charity home in the United States was established in the South Bronx area of New York City, and by 1984 the congregation operated 19 establishments throughout the country.[70]firstnameplaceholder had a heart attack in Rome in 1983 while she was visiting Pope John Paul II. Following a second attack in 1989, she received an artificial pacemaker. In 1991, after a bout of pneumonia in Mexico, she had additional heart problems. Although firstnameplaceholder offered to resign as head of the Missionaries of Charity, in a secret ballot the sisters of the congregation voted for her to stay and she agreed to continue.[71]In April 1996 she fell, breaking her collarbone, and four months later she had malaria and heart failure. Although firstnameplaceholder had heart surgery, her health was clearly declining. According to Archbishop secondnameplaceholder Henry Sebastian D'Souza, he ordered a priest to perform an exorcism (with her permission) when she was first hospitalized with cardiac problems because he thought she might be under attack by the devil.[72]On 13 March 1997 firstnameplaceholder resigned as head of the Missionaries of Charity, and she died on 5 September.[73] At the time of her death, the Missionaries of Charity had over 4,000 sisters and an associated brotherhood of 300 members operating 610 missions in 123 countries.[74] These included hospices and homes for people with HIV/AIDS, leprosy and tuberculosis, soup kitchens, children's-and family-counselling programmes, orphanages and schools. The Missionaries of Charity were aided by co-workers numbering over one million by the 1990s.[75]firstnameplaceholder lay in repose in an open casket in St Thomas, Calcutta, for a week before her funeral. She received a state funeral from the Indian government in gratitude for her service to the poor of all religions in the country.[76] Assisted by five priests, Cardinal Secretary of State Angelo Sodano, the Pope's representative, performed the last rites.[77] firstnameplaceholder's death was mourned in the secular and religious communities. Prime Minister of Pakistan Nawaz Sharif called her "a rare and unique individual who lived long for higher purposes. Her life-long devotion to the care of the poor, the sick, and the disadvantaged was one of the highest examples of service to our humanity."[78] According to former U.N. Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, "She is the United Nations. She is peace in the world."[78]
<h2>Recognition and reception</h2>
firstnameplaceholder was first recognised by the Indian government more than a third of a century earlier, receiving the Padma Shri in 1962 and the Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Understanding in 1969.[79] She later received other Indian awards, including the Bharat Ratna (India's highest civilian award) in 1980.[80] firstnameplaceholder's official biography, by Navin Chawla, was published in 1992.[81] In Kolkata, she is worshipped as a deity by some Hindus.[82]To commemorate the 100th anniversary of her birth, the government of India issued a special ₹5 coin (the amount of money firstnameplaceholder had when she arrived in India) on 28 August 2010. President Pratibha Patil said, "Clad in a white sari with a blue border, she and the sisters of Missionaries of Charity became a symbol of hope to many – the aged, the destitute, the unemployed, the diseased, the terminally ill, and those abandoned by their families."[83]Indian views of firstnameplaceholder are not uniformly favorable. Aroup Chatterjee, a physician born and raised in Calcutta who was an activist in the city's slums for years around 1980 before moving to the UK, said that he "never even saw any nuns in those slums".[84] His research, involving more than 100 interviews with volunteers, nuns and others familiar with the Missionaries of Charity, was described in a 2003 book critical of firstnameplaceholder.[84] Chatterjee criticized her for promoting a "cult of suffering" and a distorted, negative image secondnameplaceholder, exaggerating work done by her mission and misusing funds and privileges at her disposal.[84][85] According to him, some of the hygiene problems he had criticized (needle reuse, for example) improved after firstnameplaceholder's death in 1997.[84]Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharya, mayor of Kolkata from 2005 to 2010, said that "she had no significant impact on the poor of this city", glorified illness instead of treating it and misrepresented the city: "No doubt there was poverty in Calcutta, but it was never a city of lepers and beggars, as Mother firstnameplaceholder presented it."[86] On the Hindu right, the Bharatiya Janata Party clashed with firstnameplaceholder over the Christian Dalits but praised her in death and sent a representative to her funeral.[87] Vishwa Hindu Parishad, however, opposed the government decision to grant her a state funeral. Secretary Giriraj Kishore said that "her first duty was to the Church and social service was incidental", accusing her of favoring Christians and conducting "secret baptisms" of the dying.[88][89] In a front-page tribute, the Indian fortnightly Frontline dismissed the charges as "patently false" and said that they had "made no impact on the public perception of her work, especially in Calcutta". Praising her "selfless caring", energy and bravery, the author of the tribute criticized firstnameplaceholder's public campaign against abortion and her claim to be non-political.[90]In February 2015 Mohan Bhagwat, leader of the Hindu right-wing organization Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, said that firstnameplaceholder's objective was "to convert the person, who was being served, into a Christian".[91] Former RSS spokesperson M. G. Vaidhya supported Bhagwat's assessment, and the organization accused the media of "distorting facts about Bhagwat's remarks". Trinamool Congress MP Derek O'Brien, CPI leader Atul Anjan and Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal protested Bhagwat's statement.[92]firstnameplaceholder received the Ramon Magsaysay Award for Peace and International Understanding, given for work in South or East Asia, in 1962. According to its citation, "The Board of Trustees recognises her merciful cognisance of the abject poor of a foreign land, in whose service she has led a new congregation".[93] By the early 1970s, she was an international celebrity. firstnameplaceholder's fame may be partially attributed to Malcolm Muggeridge's 1969 documentary, Something Beautiful for God, and his 1971 book of the same name. Muggeridge was undergoing a spiritual journey of his own at the time.[94] During filming, footage shot in poor lighting (particularly at the Home for the Dying) was thought unlikely to be usable by the crew. In England, the footage was found to be extremely well-lit and Muggeridge called it a miracle of "divine light" from firstnameplaceholder.[95] Other crew members said that it was due to a new type of ultra-sensitive Kodak film.[96] Muggeridge later converted to Catholicism.[97]Around this time, the Catholic world began to honour firstnameplaceholder publicly. Pope Paul VI gave her the inaugural Pope John XXIII Peace Prize in 1971, commending her work with the poor, display of Christian charity and efforts for peace,[98] and she received the Pacem in Terris Award in 1976.[99] After her death, firstnameplaceholder progressed rapidly on the road to sainthood.She was honoured by governments and civilian organisations, and appointed an honorary Companion of the Order of Australia in 1982 "for service to the community of Australia and humanity at large".[100] The United Kingdom and the United States bestowed a number of awards, culminating in the Order of Merit in 1983 and honorary citizenship of the United States on 16 November 1996.[101] firstnameplaceholder's Albanian homeland gave her the Golden Honour of the Nation in 1994,[90] but her acceptance of this and the Haitian Legion of Honour was controversial. firstnameplaceholder was criticised for implicitly supporting the Duvaliers and corrupt businessmen such as Charles Keating and Robert Maxwell; she wrote to the judge of Keating's trial, requesting clemency.[90][102]Universities in India and the West granted her honorary degrees.[90] Other civilian awards included the Balzan Prize for promoting humanity, peace and brotherhood among peoples (1978)[103] and the Albert Schweitzer International Prize (1975).[104] In April 1976 firstnameplaceholder visited the University of Scranton in northeastern Pennsylvania, where she received the La Storta Medal for Human Service from university president William J. Byron.[105] She challenged an audience of 4,500 to "know poor people in your own home and local neighbourhood", feeding others or simply spreading joy and love,[106] and continued: "The poor will help us grow in sanctity, for they are Christ in the guise of distress".[105] In August 1987 firstnameplaceholder received an honorary doctor of social science degree, in recognition of her service and her ministry to help the destitute and sick, from the university.[107] She spoke to over 4,000 students and members of the Diocese of Scranton[108] about her service to the "poorest of the poor", telling them to "do small things with great love".[109]In 1979, firstnameplaceholder received the Nobel Peace Prize "for work undertaken in the struggle to overcome poverty and distress, which also constitutes a threat to peace".[110] She refused the conventional ceremonial banquet for laureates, asking that its $192,000 cost be given to the poor in India[111] and saying that earthly rewards were important only if they helped her to help the world's needy. When firstnameplaceholder received the prize she was asked, "What can we do to promote world peace?" She answered, "Go home and love your family." Building on this theme in her Nobel lecture, she said: "Around the world, not only in the poor countries, but I found the poverty of the West so much more difficult to remove. When I pick up a person from the street, hungry, I give him a plate of rice, a piece of bread, I have satisfied. I have removed that hunger. But a person that is shut out, that feels unwanted, unloved, terrified, the person that has been thrown out from society – that poverty is so hurtable  [sic] and so much, and I find that very difficult." firstnameplaceholder singled out abortion as "the greatest destroyer of peace today. Because if a mother can kill her own child – what is left for me to kill you and you kill me – there is nothing between."[112]Barbara Smoker of the secular humanist magazine The Freethinker criticised firstnameplaceholder after the Peace Prize award, saying that her promotion of Catholic moral teachings on abortion and contraception diverted funds from effective methods to solve India's problems.[113] At the Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing, firstnameplaceholder said: "Yet we can destroy this gift of motherhood, especially by the evil of abortion, but also by thinking that other things like jobs or positions are more important than loving."[114]During her lifetime, firstnameplaceholder was among the top 10 women in the annual Gallup's most admired man and woman poll 18 times, finishing first several times in the 1980s and 1990s.[115] In 1999 she headed Gallup's List of Most Widely Admired People of the 20th Century,[116] out-polling all other volunteered answers by a wide margin, and was first in all major demographic categories except the very young.[116][117]
<h2>Criticism</h2>
According to a paper by Canadian academics Serge Larivée, Geneviève Chénard and Carole Sénéchal, firstnameplaceholder's clinics received millions of dollars in donations but lacked medical care, systematic diagnosis, necessary nutrition and sufficient analgesics for those in pain;[118] in the opinion of the three academics, "Mother firstnameplaceholder believed the sick must suffer like Christ on the cross".[119] It was said that the additional money might have transformed the health of the city's poor by creating advanced palliative care facilities.[120][121]One of firstnameplaceholder's most outspoken critics was English journalist, literary critic and antitheist Christopher Hitchens, host of the documentary Hell's Angel (1994) and author of the essay The Missionary Position: Mother firstnameplaceholder in Theory and Practice (1995) who wrote in a 2003 article: "This returns us to the medieval corruption of the church, which sold indulgences to the rich while preaching hellfire and continence to the poor. [Mother firstnameplaceholder] was not a friend of the poor. She was a friend of poverty. She said that suffering was a gift from God. She spent her life opposing the only known cure for poverty, which is the empowerment of women and the emancipation of them from a livestock version of compulsory reproduction."[122] He accused her of hypocrisy for choosing advanced treatment for her heart condition.[123][124] Hitchens said that "her intention was not to help people", and that she lied to donors about how their contributions were used. "It was by talking to her that I discovered, and she assured me, that she wasn't working to alleviate poverty", he said, "She was working to expand the number of Catholics. She said, 'I'm not a social worker. I don't do it for this reason. I do it for Christ. I do it for the church.'"[125] Although Hitchens thought he was the only witness called by the Vatican, Aroup Chatterjee (author of Mother firstnameplaceholder: The Untold Story) was also called to present evidence opposing firstnameplaceholder's beatification and canonisation;[126] the Vatican had abolished the traditional "devil's advocate", which served a similar purpose.[126]Abortion-rights groups have also criticised firstnameplaceholder's stance against abortion and contraception.[127][128][129]
<h2>Spiritual life</h2>
Analysing her deeds and achievements, Pope John Paul II said: "Where did Mother firstnameplaceholder find the strength and perseverance to place herself completely at the service of others? She found it in prayer and in the silent contemplation of Jesus Christ, his Holy Face, his Sacred Heart."[130] Privately, firstnameplaceholder experienced doubts and struggle in her religious beliefs which lasted nearly 50 years until the end of her life.[131] firstnameplaceholder expressed grave doubts about God's existence and pain over her lack of faith:Other saints (including firstnameplaceholder's namesake Thérèse of Lisieux, who called it a "night of nothingness") had similar experiences of spiritual dryness.[133] According to James Langford, these doubts were typical and would not be an impediment to canonisation.[133]After ten years of doubt, firstnameplaceholder described a brief period of renewed faith. After Pope Pius XII's death in 1958, she was praying  for him at a requiem mass when she was relieved of "the long darkness: that strange suffering." However, five weeks later her spiritual dryness returned.[134]firstnameplaceholder wrote many letters to her confessors and superiors over a 66-year period, most notably to Calcutta Archbishop Ferdinand Perier and Jesuit priest Celeste van Exem (her spiritual advisor since the formation of the Missionaries of Charity).[135] She requested that her letters be destroyed, concerned that "people will think more of me – less of Jesus."[94][136]However, the correspondence has been compiled in Mother firstnameplaceholder: Come Be My Light.[94][137] firstnameplaceholder wrote to spiritual confidant Michael van der Peet, "Jesus has a very special love for you. [But] as for me, the silence and the emptiness is so great, that I look and do not see – listen and do not hear – the tongue moves [in prayer] but does not speak. ... I want you to pray for me – that I let Him have [a] free hand."In Deus caritas est (his first encyclical), Pope Benedict XVI mentioned firstnameplaceholder three times and used her life to clarify one of the encyclical's main points: "In the example of Blessed firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder we have a clear illustration of the fact that time devoted to God in prayer not only does not detract from effective and loving service to our neighbour but is in fact the inexhaustible source of that service."[138] She wrote, "It is only by mental prayer and spiritual reading that we can cultivate the gift of prayer."[139]Although her order was not connected with the Franciscan orders, firstnameplaceholder admired Francis of Assisi[140] and was influenced by Franciscan spirituality. The Sisters of Charity recite the prayer of Saint Francis every morning at Mass during the thanksgiving after Communion, and their emphasis on ministry and many of their vows are similar.[140] Francis emphasised poverty, chastity, obedience and submission to Christ. He devoted much of his life to serving the poor, particularly lepers.[141]
<h2>Canonisation</h2>
After firstnameplaceholder's death in 1997, the Holy See began the process of beatification (the second of three steps towards canonisation) and Kolodiejchuk was appointed postulator by the Diocese secondnameplaceholder. Although he said, "We didn't have to prove that she was perfect or never made a mistake ...", he had to prove that firstnameplaceholder's virtue was heroic. Kolodiejchuk submitted 76 documents, totalling 35,000 pages, which were based on interviews with 113 witnesses who were asked to answer 263 questions.[142]The process of canonisation requires the documentation of a miracle resulting from the intercession of the prospective saint.[143] In 2002 the Vatican recognised as a miracle the healing of a tumour in the abdomen of Monica Besra, an Indian woman, after the application of a locket containing firstnameplaceholder's picture. According to Besra, a beam of light emanated from the picture and her cancerous tumour was cured; however, her husband and some of her medical staff said that conventional medical treatment eradicated the tumour.[144] Ranjan Mustafi, who told The New York Times he had treated Besra, said that the cyst was caused by tuberculosis: "It was not a miracle ... She took medicines for nine months to one year."[145] According to Besra's husband, "My wife was cured by the doctors and not by any miracle ... This miracle is a hoax."[146] Besra said that her medical records, including sonograms, prescriptions and physicians' notes, were confiscated by Sister Betta of the Missionaries of Charity. According to Time, calls to Sister Betta and the office of Sister Nirmala (firstnameplaceholder's successor as head of the order) elicited no comment. Officials at Balurghat Hospital, where Besra sought medical treatment, said that they were pressured by the order to call her cure miraculous.[146] In February 2000, former West Bengal health minister Partho De ordered a review of Besra's medical records at the Department of Health in Kolkata. According to De, there was nothing unusual about her illness and cure based on her lengthy treatment. He said that he had refused to give the Vatican the name of a doctor who would certify that Monica Besra's healing was a miracle.[147]During firstnameplaceholder's beatification and canonisation, the Roman Curia (the Vatican) studied published and unpublished criticism of her life and work. Hitchens and Chatterjee (author of The Final Verdict, a book critical of firstnameplaceholder) spoke to the tribunal; according to Vatican officials, the allegations raised were investigated by the Congregation for the Causes of Saints.[142] The group found no obstacle to firstnameplaceholder's canonisation, and issued its nihil obstat on 21 April 1999.[148][149] Because of the attacks on her, some Catholic writers called her a sign of contradiction.[150] firstnameplaceholder was beatified on 19 October 2003, and was known by Catholics as "Blessed".[151]On 17 December 2015, the Vatican Press Office confirmed that Pope Francis recognised a second miracle attributed to firstnameplaceholder: the healing of a Brazilian man with multiple brain tumours back in 2008.[152] The miracle first came to the attention of the postulation (officials managing the cause) during the events of World Youth Day 2013 when the pope was in Brazil that July. A subsequent investigation took place in Brazil from 19–26 June 2015 which was later transferred to the Congregation for the Causes of Saints who issued a decree recognizing the investigation to be completed.[152]Francis canonised her at a ceremony on 4 September 2016 in St. Peter's Square in Vatican City. Tens of thousands of people witnessed the ceremony, including 15 government delegations and 1,500 homeless people from across Italy.[153][154] It was televised live on the Vatican channel and streamed online; Skopje, firstnameplaceholder's hometown, announced a week-long celebration of her canonisation.[153] In India, a special Mass was celebrated by the Missionaries of Charity in Kolkata.[154]
<h2>Co-Patron of Calcutta Archdiocese</h2>
On 4 September 2017, during a celebration honoring the 1st anniversary of her canonization, Sister Mary Prema Pierick, Superior-General of the Missionaries of Charity, announced that firstnameplaceholder would be made the co-patron of the Calcutta Archdiocese during a Mass in the Cathedral of the Most Holy Rosary at 5.30 pm on 6 September 2017.[155]  On 5 September 2017, Archbishop Thomas D'Souza, who serves as head of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese secondnameplaceholder, confirmed that firstnameplaceholder will be named co-patron of the Calcutta Diocese, alongside Francis Xavier.[156][157]  On 6 September 2017, about 500 people attended the Mass at a cathedral where Dominique Gomes, the local Vicar General,[158] read the decree instituting her as the second patron saint of the archdiocese.[159]  The ceremony was also presided over by D'Souza and the Vatican's ambassador to India, Giambattista Diquattro, who lead the Mass and inaugurated a bronze statue in the church of Mother firstnameplaceholder carrying a child.[159]The Roman Catholic Church declared St. Francis Xavier the first patron saint secondnameplaceholder in 1986.[159]
<h2>Legacy and depictions in popular culture</h2>
firstnameplaceholder has been commemorated by museums and named the patroness of a number of churches. She has had buildings, roads and complexes named after her, including Albania's international airport. Mother firstnameplaceholder Day (Dita e Nënë Terezës), 19 October, is a public holiday in Albania. In 2009 the Memorial House of Mother firstnameplaceholder was opened in her hometown of Skopje, North Macedonia. The Roman Catholic cathedral in Pristina, Kosovo, is named in her honour.[160] Its construction, begun in 2011, sparked controversy in Muslim circles who saw it as oversized relative to the number of Catholics in the area. An initiative to erect a monument to firstnameplaceholder in the town of Peć (according to activists, 98 percent Muslim) was opposed by Kosovo Muslims.[160]Mother firstnameplaceholder Women's University,[161] in Kodaikanal, was established in 1984 as a public university by the government of Tamil Nadu. The Mother Theresa Postgraduate and Research Institute of Health Sciences,[162] in Pondicherry, was established in 1999 by the government of Puducherry. The charitable organisation Sevalaya runs the Mother firstnameplaceholder Girls Home, providing poor and orphaned girls near the underserved village of Kasuva in Tamil Nadu with free food, clothing, shelter and education.[163] A number of tributes by firstnameplaceholder's biographer, Navin Chawla, have appeared in Indian newspapers and magazines.[164][165][166] Indian Railways introduced the "Mother Express", a new train named after Mother firstnameplaceholder, on 26 August 2010 to commemorate the centenary of her birth.[167] The Tamil Nadu government organised centenary celebrations honouring firstnameplaceholder on 4 December 2010 in Chennai, headed by chief minister M Karunanidhi.[168][169] Beginning on 5 September 2013, the anniversary of her death has been designated the International Day of Charity by the United Nations General Assembly.[170]In 2012, firstnameplaceholder was ranked number 5 in Outlook India's poll of the Greatest Indian.[171]On 5 September 2017, St. firstnameplaceholder Cathedral, the first Roman Catholic cathedral named in firstnameplaceholder's honor, was consecrated in Kosovo.[172] The Cathedral is also Kosovo's first Roman Catholic cathedral as well.[172]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (born November 26, 1931) is an Argentine activist, community organizer, painter, writer and sculptor. He was the recipient of the 1980 Nobel Peace Prize for his opposition to Argentina's last civil-military dictatorship (1976–1983), during which he was detained, tortured, and held without trial for 14 months; during that period he also received, among other distinctions, the Pope John XXIII Peace Memorial.[1]
<h2>Biography</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born in Buenos Aires to a Spanish fisherman from Poio, Galicia, who emigrated to Argentina. His mother died when he was three, and despite his poverty, he attended the Manuel Belgrano School of Fine Arts and the National University of La Plata, where he was trained as a painter and sculptor.[2] He was appointed professor of architecture and worked with a variety of sculptural media, and for 25 years taught in all levels from primary to university. secondnameplaceholder began working with popularly based Latin American Christian pacifist groups during the 1960s. He relinquished his teaching post in 1974, when he was chosen as coordinator general for a network of Latin America-based communities promoting liberation of the poor through non-violence.[1]When systematic repression followed the March 1976 coup, which brought the dictatorship of General Jorge Videla to power, secondnameplaceholder contributed to the formation and financing of the linkages between popularly based organizations to defend human rights in Argentina and support the families of the victims of the Dirty War. The NGO Servicio Paz y Justicia ("Service, Peace and Justice Foundation", or SERPAJ), which he co-founded in 1974, and served as an instrument for the defense of human rights by promoting an international campaign to denounce the atrocities committed by the military regime.[3] SERPAJ is a  member of the International Fellowship of Reconciliation (IFOR), which supported Esquivel's work from the beginning.[4]secondnameplaceholder was detained by the Brazilian Military Police in 1975. He was jailed in 1976 in Ecuador, along with Latin American and North American bishops. He was detained in Buenos Aires in 1977 by the Argentine Federal Police, tortured, and held without trial for 14 months; during that, he received, among other distinctions, the Pope John XXIII Peace Memorial.[1]Nominated by 1976 Nobel Peace Prize laureates Mairead Corrigan and Betty Williams,[5] secondnameplaceholder was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize on December 10, 1980, for his efforts in the defense of human rights. Accepting the prize "in the name of the poorest and smallest of my brothers and sisters,"[5] he donated the prize money to charity.[6] He remained active in support of the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo despite ongoing harassment by the dictatorship,[6] and later joined causes in support of the indigenous peoples of Argentina and environmentalism and against austerity policies and the Free Trade Area of the Americas.[5]secondnameplaceholder was awarded the Pacem in Terris Award in 1999.secondnameplaceholder served as president of the Honorary Council of Service, Latin American Peace and Justice Foundation and of the International League for Human Rights and Liberation of Peoples (based in Milan), and as a member of the Permanent Peoples' Tribunal. He published Caminando Junto al Pueblo ("Walking Together with the People", 1995), in which he relates his experiences with nonviolence in Latin America, and he was appointed Professor of Peace and Human Rights Studies at the University of Buenos Aires in 1998.[7] He campaigned during 2010 against the practice on the part of the Esquel Police Department of training children into paramilitary squads, an operation that he compared to the creation of Nazi Germany's Hitler Youth.[8]He opposed the European intervention in the 2011 Libyan Civil War and warned against an intervention in the Syrian Civil War.[9] In the aftermath of the death of Osama bin Laden, he sent a letter to President Barack Obama suggesting the United States killed rather than tried bin Laden because he could have revealed unsettling information about 9/11.[9] He argued, "You know that there are people who have investigated the tragic events of 9/11/2001 and claim there is evidence that this was a self-coup (self-inflicted attack)."[9] Later, he added, "this event was the perfect excuse to launch a war against Afghanistan and Iraq and now against Libya," and referred to the United States an "axis of evil."[9]secondnameplaceholder expressed himself regarding the historic, March 13, 2013, election of Archbishop of Buenos Aires Jorge Bergoglio as Pope Francis, stating that as Provincial superior of Jesuits "he had lacked the sufficient courage shown by other Bishops to support our cause for human rights during the dictatorship."[10] secondnameplaceholder also said that "Bergoglio did what he could given his age at that time."[11] He, however, clarified that the future Pope "was no accomplice and had no links with the dictatorship" and that while "it is said he did not do enough to get two priests out of jail, I know personally that many bishops called on the military junta for the release of prisoners and priests and that these requests were not granted."[12]In June 2017 he has been defending the government of Nicolás Maduro, in Venezuela, claiming that the country is undergoing a coup d'état attempt, orchestrated by the United States.[13]
<h2>Works of art</h2>
Esquivel's work[14] ranges from exhibitions to murals and monuments, including the 15 station Latin American Via Crucis (including a Lenten cloth "A new sky and a new land") made in 1992 to commemorate the 500th anniversary of the conquest of America; Monument to Refugees, located in the Headquarters of the UNHCR in Switzerland; the Latin American Peoples Mural in the Cathedral of Riobamba, Ecuador, dedicated to Monsignor Proaño and the indigenous peoples; and a bronze statue in tribute to Mahatma Gandhi at Gandhi Square, in Barcelona.
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (20 March 1911 – 2 September 1991) was a Mexican diplomat and politician who, in conjunction with Sweden's Alva Myrdal, received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1982.secondnameplaceholder was born in Zamora, Michoacán, and trained in law at the National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM), the Institute of Higher International Studies in Paris, France (1936) and the Hague Academy of International Law in the Netherlands (1938) before joining his country's foreign service in 1939.He served as a delegate to the 1945 San Francisco Conference that established the United Nations. 
He was ambassador to Brazil from 1962 to 1964, and was state secretary to the ministry of foreign affairs from 1964 to 1970.  In 1971–1975 he served as his country's representative to the United Nations before an appointment as foreign minister in 1975–76.  He was then appointed as Mexico's permanent representative to the Committee on Disarmament of the UN.secondnameplaceholder received the peace prize as the driving force behind the Treaty of Tlatelolco, setting up a nuclear-free zone in Latin America and the Caribbean.  The agreement was signed in 1967 by most states in the region, though some states took some time to ratify the agreement.He was admitted to the Colegio Nacional of Mexico in 1972. His name was inscribed at the Wall of Honor of the Palacio Legislativo de San Lázaro, Mexico's House of Representatives' building, in 2003. His widow died in 2005 aged 83.
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (/ˈmɜːrdɑːl, ˈmɪər-/ MUR-dahl, MEER-, Swedish: [ˈǎlːva ˈmy̌ːɖɑːl]; née Reimer; 31 January 1902 – 1 February 1986) was a Swedish sociologist, diplomat and politician. She was a prominent leader of the disarmament movement. She, along with Alfonso García Robles, received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1982. She married Gunnar secondnameplaceholder in 1924.
<h2>Biography</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was born in Uppsala and grew up as the first child of a modest family, the daughter of Albert Reimer (1876–1943) and Lowa Jonsson (1877–1943). She had four siblings: Ruth (1904–1980), Folke (1906–1977), May (1909–1941) and Stig (1912–1977). Her father was a socialist and modern liberal. During her childhood the family moved around to different places. For example, they were residents of Eskilstuna, Fairfield and Stockholm. Her academic studies involved psychology and family sociology. She earned a Bachelor of Science degree in Stockholm in 1924.In 1929, secondnameplaceholder and her husband Gunnar secondnameplaceholder had the opportunity to travel to the US as Rockefeller Fellows. secondnameplaceholder further deepened her studies in the fields of psychology, education and sociology whilst in the US. She had the special chance to broaden her knowledge of children's education. secondnameplaceholder's observation of the great social and economic disparities in the United States also led to an increased political commitment – "radical" was the term that she and her husband came to use to describe their shared political outlook They then moved to Geneva for further studies, where they started to so study the population decline that worried many Europeans during the interwar period.secondnameplaceholder first came to public attention in the 1930s, and was one of the main driving forces in the creation of the Swedish welfare state. She coauthored the book Crisis in the Population Question (Swedish: Kris i befolkningsfrågan with Gunnar secondnameplaceholder in 1934). The basic premise of Crisis in the Population Question is to find what social reforms are needed to allow for individual liberty (especially for women) while also promoting child-bearing, and encouraging Swedes to have children. The book also detailed the importance of shared responsibility for children's education both between the parents as well as the community by trained child educators.secondnameplaceholder was highly critical of developments in the operation of preschools for children in Sweden. Consequently, she published the book Urban Children (1935), where she presented her ideas for a newly reformed Swedish preschool system. She argued that contemporary child care was flawed. The system was polarized between two extremes – measures of 'poor relief' for the less well-off contrasted with those measures which prepared children from wealthier families for private schools. She stressed that there were material obstacles in the way of being able to access a good education. Therefore, social and economic reforms were needed. secondnameplaceholder wanted to combine and integrate the two extremes.A year later, she was able to put her theory into practice, as she became director of the National Educational Seminar, which she cofounded in 1936. She personally worked there as a teacher and pedagogue by training preschool teachers. secondnameplaceholder emphasized the lack of recent educational research in regards to preschool teacher training. Her teaching tried to integrate the new discoveries in child psychology in education. Social studies were also emphasized, as was women's personal development.With architect Sven Markelius, secondnameplaceholder designed Stockholm's cooperative Collective House in 1937, with an eye towards developing more domestic liberty for women.In 1938, firstnameplaceholder and Gunnar secondnameplaceholder moved to the United States. While in the US, secondnameplaceholder published the book Nation and Family (1941) concerning the Swedish family unit and population policy. During World War II, she also periodically lived in Sweden.A long-time prominent member of the Swedish Social Democratic Party, in the late 1940s she became involved in international issues with the United Nations, appointed to head its section on welfare policy in 1949. From 1950 to 1955 she was chairman of UNESCO's social science section—the first woman to hold such prominent positions in the UN. In 1955–1956, she served as a Swedish envoy to New Delhi, India, Yangon, Myanmar and Colombo, Sri Lanka.[1]In 1962, secondnameplaceholder was elected to the Riksdag, and in 1962 she was sent as the Swedish delegate to the UN disarmament conference in Geneva, a role she kept until 1973. During the negotiations in Geneva, she played an extremely active role, emerging as the leader of the group of nonaligned nations which endeavored to bring pressure to bear on the two superpowers (US and USSR, respectively) to show greater concern for concrete disarmament measures. Her experiences from the years spent in Geneva found an outlet in her book "The game of disarmament", in which she expresses her disappointment at the reluctance of the US and the USSR to disarm.[2]secondnameplaceholder participated in the creation of the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, becoming the first Chairman of the governing board in 1966. In 1967 she was also named consultative Cabinet minister for disarmament, an office she held until 1973. secondnameplaceholder also wrote the acclaimed book The Game of Disarmament, originally published in 1976. A vocal supporter of disarmament, secondnameplaceholder received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1982 together with Alfonso García Robles. In 1983 secondnameplaceholder effectively ended the heated controversy over the future of Adolf Fredrik's Music School, "The AF-fight" (Swedish: AF-striden).[3]secondnameplaceholder promoted reforms in child care and later became a government commission on women's work and chair of the Federation of Business and Professional Women.[4]
<h2>Personal life</h2>
In 1924, she married Professor Gunnar secondnameplaceholder (1898–1987), the son of C A Pettersson and Sofie Carlsson. She is the mother of Jan secondnameplaceholder (born 1927), Sissela Bok (born 1934) and Kaj Fölster [sv] (born 1936).[5]Her grandson is Stefan Fölster (born 1959).
<h2>Death</h2>
She died the day after her 84th birthday.
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (/ˈlɛx vəˈwɛnsə, vɑːˈlɛnsə/;[1][2] Polish: [ˈlɛɣ vaˈwɛ̃sa] (listen);[3] born 29 September 1943) is a Polish statesman, dissident, and Nobel Peace Prize laureate, who served as the President of Poland between 1990 and 1995. After winning the 1990 election, secondnameplaceholder became the first democratically elected President of Poland since 1926 and the first ever Polish President elected in popular vote. A shipyard electrician by trade, secondnameplaceholder became the leader of the Solidarity movement, and led a successful pro-democratic effort which in 1989 ended the Communist rule in Poland and ushered in the end of the Cold War.[4][5][6]While working at the Lenin Shipyard (now Gdańsk Shipyard), secondnameplaceholder, an electrician, became a trade-union activist, for which he was persecuted by the Communist authorities, placed under surveillance, fired in 1976, and arrested several times. In August 1980, he was instrumental in political negotiations that led to the ground-breaking Gdańsk Agreement between striking workers and the government. He co-founded the Solidarity trade-union which membership rose to over ten million people.[7]After martial law in Poland was imposed and Solidarity was outlawed, secondnameplaceholder was again arrested. Released from custody, he continued his activism and was prominent in the establishment of the Round Table Agreement that led to the semi-free 1989 Polish legislative election and a Solidarity-led government.[8] He presided over Poland's successful transition from Communism into a free-market liberal democracy, but his active role in Polish politics diminished after he narrowly lost the 1995 Polish presidential election.[9][10][11] In 1995, he established the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Institute.[12]Since 1980, secondnameplaceholder has received hundreds of prizes, honors and awards from many countries of the world. He was named the Time Person of the Year (1981) and one of Time's 100 most important people of the 20th century (1999). He has received over forty honorary degrees, including from Harvard University and Columbia University, as well as dozens of the highest state orders, including: the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the Knight Grand Cross of the British Order of the Bath, and the French Grand Cross of Legion of Honour.[13][14] In 1989, secondnameplaceholder was the first foreign non-head of state to address the Joint Meeting of the U.S. Congress.[15] The Gdańsk firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Airport bears his name since 2004.[16]
<h2>Personal life</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born in Popowo, Reichsgau Danzig-West Prussia, Germany (German-occupied Poland).[17] His father, Bolesław secondnameplaceholder (1908–1945), was a carpenter who was rounded up and interned in a forced labour camp at Młyniec (outpost of KL Stutthof) by the German occupying forces before firstnameplaceholder was born.[note 1] Bolesław returned home after the war but died two months later from exhaustion and illness.[18] firstnameplaceholder's mother, Feliksa secondnameplaceholder (née Kamieńska; 1916–1975),[19] has been credited with shaping her son's beliefs and tenacity.[20]When firstnameplaceholder was nine, Feliksa married her brother-in-law, Stanisław secondnameplaceholder (1916–1981), a farmer.[21] firstnameplaceholder had three elder full siblings; Izabela (1934–2012),[note 2] Edward (born 1937), and Stanisław (born 1939); and three younger half-brothers; Tadeusz (born 1946), Zygmunt (born 1948), and Wojciech (1951–1988).[22] In 1973, firstnameplaceholder's mother and stepfather emigrated to the US for economic reasons.[21] They lived in Jersey City, New Jersey, where Feliksa died in a car accident in 1975, and Stanisław died of a heart attack in 1981.[21] Both of them were buried in Poland.[22]In 1961, firstnameplaceholder graduated from primary and vocational school in nearby Chalin and Lipno as a qualified electrician. He worked as a car mechanic from 1961 to 1965, and then embarked on his two-year, obligatory military service, attaining the rank of corporal before beginning work on 12 July 1967 as an electrician at Lenin Shipyard  (Stocznia Gdańska im. Lenina), now called Gdańsk Shipyard (Stocznia Gdańska) in Gdańsk.[23]On 8 November 1969, secondnameplaceholder married Mirosława Danuta Gołoś, who worked at a flower shop near the Lenin Shipyard. Soon after they married, she began using her middle name more often than her first name, per firstnameplaceholder's request.[24] The couple had eight children; Bogdan (born 1970), Sławomir (born 1972), Przemysław[25] (1974–2017), Jarosław (born 1976), Magdalena (born 1979), Anna (born 1980), Maria-Wiktoria (born 1982), and Brygida (born 1985).[26][27] As of 2016[update], Anna is running her father's office in Gdańsk[28] and Jarosław is a European MP.[29]In 2008, secondnameplaceholder underwent a coronary artery stent placement and the implantation of a cardiac pacemaker at the Houston Methodist Hospital in Houston, Texas.[30]
<h2>Solidarity movement</h2>
From early in his career, secondnameplaceholder was interested in workers' concerns; in 1968 he encouraged shipyard colleagues to boycott official rallies that condemned recent student strikes.[26] He was a charismatic leader,[31] who helped organize the illegal 1970 protests at the Gdańsk Shipyard when workers protested the government's decree raising food prices and he was considered for the position of chairman of the strike committee.[17][26] The strikes' outcome, which involved the deaths of over 30 workers, galvanized secondnameplaceholder's views on the need for change.[26] In June 1976, secondnameplaceholder lost his job at the Gdańsk Shipyard because of his continued involvement in illegal unions, strikes, and a campaign to commemorate the victims of the 1970 protests.[17][26][27] Afterwards, he worked as an electrician for several other companies but his activism led to him continually being laid off and he was jobless for long periods.[26] secondnameplaceholder and his family were under constant surveillance by the Polish secret police; his home and workplace were always bugged.[26] Over the next few years, he was arrested several times for participating in dissident activities.[17]secondnameplaceholder worked closely with the Workers' Defence Committee (KOR), a group that emerged to lend aid to people arrested after the 1976 labor strikes and to their families.[17] In June 1978, he became an activist of the underground Free Trade Unions of the Coast (Wolne Związki Zawodowe Wybrzeża).[27] On 14 August 1980, another rise in food prices led to a strike at the Lenin Shipyard in Gdańsk, of which secondnameplaceholder was one of the instigators. secondnameplaceholder climbed over the shipyard fence and quickly became one of the strike leaders.[17][26] The strike inspired other similar strikes in Gdańsk, which then spread across Poland. secondnameplaceholder headed the Inter-Enterprise Strike Committee, coordinating the workers at Gdańsk and at 20 other plants in the region.[17] On 31 August, the government, represented by Mieczysław Jagielski, signed an accord (the Gdańsk Agreement) with the Strike Coordinating Committee.[17] The agreement granted the Lenin Shipyard workers the right to strike and permitted them to form an independent trade union.[32] The Strike Coordinating Committee legalized itself as the National Coordinating Committee of the Solidarność (Solidarity) Free Trade Union, and secondnameplaceholder was chosen as chairman of the Committee.[17][27] The Solidarity trade union quickly grew, ultimately claiming over 10 million members—more than a quarter of Poland's population.[33] secondnameplaceholder's role in the strike, in the negotiations, and in the newly formed independent trade union gained him fame on the international stage.[17][26]On 10 March 1981, through the introduction of his former superior in the army,  secondnameplaceholder met Jaruzelski for the first time in the office building of the Council of Ministers for three hours. During the meeting, Jaruzelski and secondnameplaceholder agreed that mutual trust was necessary if the problems of Poland were to be solved. secondnameplaceholder said "It's not the case that the name of socialism is bad. Only some people spoiled the name of socialism". He also complained about and criticized the government. Jaruzelski informed secondnameplaceholder of the coming war games of the Warsaw Pact from 16 to 25 March, hoping he could help maintain the social order and avoid anti-Soviet remarks. Jaruzelski also reminded secondnameplaceholder that Solidarity had used foreign funds. secondnameplaceholder joked "We don't have to take only dollars. We can take corn, fertilizer, anything is okay. I told Mr. Kania before that I would take everything from the enemy. The more the better, until the enemy was weakened no more".[34]
[35]secondnameplaceholder held his position until 13 December 1981, when General Wojciech Jaruzelski declared martial law in Poland.[17] secondnameplaceholder and many other Solidarity leaders and activists were arrested; he was incarcerated for 11 months until 14 November 1982 at Chylice, Otwock, and Arłamów; eastern towns near the Soviet border.[26][27] On 8 October 1982, Solidarity was outlawed.[36] In 1983, secondnameplaceholder applied to return to the Gdańsk Shipyard as an electrician.[26] The same year, he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.[17] He was unable to accept it himself, fearing Poland's government would not let him back into the country.[17][26] His wife Danuta accepted the prize on his behalf.[17][26]Through the mid-1980s, secondnameplaceholder continued underground Solidarity-related activities.[37] Every issue of the leading underground weekly publication Tygodnik Mazowsze bore his motto, "Solidarity will not be divided or destroyed".[38] Following a 1986 amnesty for Solidarity activists,[39] secondnameplaceholder co-founded the Provisional Council of NSZZ Solidarity (Tymczasowa Rada NSZZ Solidarność), the first overt legal Solidarity entity since the declaration of martial law.[37] From 1987 to 1990, he organized and led the semi-illegal Provisional Executive Committee of the Solidarity Trade Union. In mid-1988, he instigated work-stoppage strikes at the Gdańsk Shipyard.[37]  He was frequently hauled in for interrogations by the Polish secret police, the Security Service (SB), during the 1980s. On many of these occasions, Danuta—who was even more anti-Communist than her husband—was known to openly taunt SB agents when they picked firstnameplaceholder up.[40]After months of strikes and political deliberations, at the conclusion of the 10th plenary session of the Polish United Workers' Party (PZPR, the Polish communist party), the government agreed to enter into Round Table Negotiations that lasted from February to April 1989.[17] secondnameplaceholder was an informal leader of the non-governmental side in the negotiations.[27] During the talks, he traveled throughout Poland giving speeches in support of the negotiations.[17] At the end of the talks, the government signed an agreement to re-establish the Solidarity Trade Union and to organize semi-free elections to the Polish parliament; in accordance with the Round Table Agreement, only members of the Communist Party and its allies could stand for 65 percent of the seats in the lower house, the Sejm.[17][33][41][42]In December 1988, secondnameplaceholder co-founded the Solidarity Citizens' Committee;[27] this was ostensibly an advisory body but in practice a political party that won the parliamentary elections in June 1989. Solidarity took all the seats in the Sejm that were subject to free elections, and all but one seat in the newly re-established Senate.[43] secondnameplaceholder was one of Solidarity's most public figures; he was an active campaigner, appearing on many campaign posters, but did not run for parliament himself.[17] Solidarity winners in the Sejm elections were referred to as "secondnameplaceholder's team" or "firstnameplaceholder's team" because they had all appeared on their election posters with secondnameplaceholder.[44][45]While ostensibly only chairman of Solidarity, secondnameplaceholder played a key role in practical politics. In August 1989, he persuaded leaders of parties formerly allied with the Communist Party to form a non-communist coalition government—the first non-Communist government in the Soviet Bloc. The parliament elected Tadeusz Mazowiecki as the first non-communist Prime Minister of Poland in over forty years.[33]
<h2>Presidency</h2>
Following the June 1989 parliamentary elections, secondnameplaceholder was disappointed that some of his former fellow campaigners were satisfied to govern alongside former Communists.[33] He decided to run for the newly re-established office of president, using the slogan, "I don't want to, but I have to" ("Nie chcę, ale muszę.").[17][33] On 9 December 1990, secondnameplaceholder won the presidential election, defeating Prime Minister Mazowiecki and other candidates to become Poland's first freely elected head of state in 63 years, and the first non-Communist head of state in 45 years.[26] In 1993, he founded his own political party, the Nonpartisan Bloc for Support of Reforms (BBWR); the grouping's Polish-language acronym echoed that of Józef Piłsudski's "Nonpartisan Bloc for Cooperation with the Government," of 1928–35, likewise an ostensibly non-political organization.[46]During his presidency, secondnameplaceholder saw Poland through privatization and transition to a free-market economy (the Balcerowicz Plan), Poland's 1991 first completely free parliamentary elections, and a period of redefinition of the country's foreign relations.[17][31] He successfully negotiated the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Poland and won a substantial reduction in foreign debts.[26]secondnameplaceholder supported Poland's entry into NATO and the European Union, both of which occurred after his presidency, in 1999 and 2004, respectively.[26] In the early 1990s, he proposed the creation of a sub-regional security system called NATO bis. The concept was supported by right-wing and populist movements in Poland but garnered little support abroad; Poland's neighbors, some of which (e.g. Lithuania), had recently regained independence and tended to see the proposal as Polish neo-imperialism.[33][47]secondnameplaceholder has been criticized for a confrontational style and for instigating "war at the top", whereby former Solidarity allies clashed with one another, causing annual changes of government.[31][33][38][48][49] This increasingly isolated secondnameplaceholder on the political scene.[50] As he lost political allies, he came to be surrounded by people who were viewed by the public as incompetent and disreputable.[38][50] Mudslinging during election campaigns tarnished his reputation.[17][51] Some thought secondnameplaceholder, an ex-electrician with no higher education, was too plain-spoken and too undignified for the post of president.[31][33][52] Others thought him too erratic in his views[33][49][53] or complained he was too authoritarian and that he sought to strengthen his own power at the expense of the Sejm.[33][49][50][52] secondnameplaceholder's national security advisor Jacek Merkel credited the shortcomings of secondnameplaceholder's presidency to his inability to comprehend the office of the president as an institution. He was an effective union leader capable of articulating what the workers felt but as president he had difficulty delegating power or navigating bureaucracy.[54][clarification needed] secondnameplaceholder's problems were compounded by the difficult transition to a market economy; in the long run it was seen as highly successful but it lost secondnameplaceholder's government much popular support.[49][50][55]secondnameplaceholder's BBWR performed poorly in the 1993 parliamentary elections; at times his popular support dwindled to 10 percent and he narrowly lost the 1995 presidential election, winning 33.11 percent of the vote in the first round and 48.28 percent in the run-off against Aleksander Kwaśniewski, who represented the resurgent Polish post-Communist Democratic Left Alliance (SLD).[17][33][50] secondnameplaceholder's fate was sealed by his poor handling of the media; in televised debates he appeared incoherent and rude;  in response to Kwaśniewski's extended hand at the end of the first of the two debates, he replied that the post-Communist leader could "shake his leg".[50] After the election, secondnameplaceholder said he was going into "political retirement" and his role in politics became increasingly marginal.[48][56][57]
<h2>Post-presidency</h2>
After losing the 1995 election, secondnameplaceholder announced he would return to work as an electrician at the Gdańsk Shipyard.[58] Soon afterwards, he changed his mind and chose to travel around the world on a lecture circuit.[59] secondnameplaceholder developed a portfolio of three lectures ("The Impact of an Expanded NATO on Global Security", "Democracy: The Never-Ending Battle" and "Solidarity: The New Millennium"), and reads them at universities and public events with an appearance fee of around £50,000 ($70,000).[60][61][62]In 1995, he founded the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Institute[12], a think tank with a mission "to popularize the achievements of Polish Solidarity, educate young generations, promote democracy, and build civil society in Poland and around the world".[12][63] In 1997, he founded a new party, Christian Democracy of the 3rd Polish Republic, hoping it would help him to successfully run in future elections.[64]secondnameplaceholder's contention for the 2000 presidential election ended with a crushing defeat when he polled 1.01 percent of the vote.[65][66] His humiliation was increased because Aleksander Kwaśniewski, who was re-elected in the first round with 54 percent of the vote, is a former Communist apparatchik.[65] secondnameplaceholder polled in seventh place,[65] after which he announced his withdrawal from Polish politics.[67]In 2006, secondnameplaceholder quit Solidarity in protest of the union's support of the ruling right-wing Law and Justice party, and firstnameplaceholder and Jarosław Kaczyński—twin brothers who had been prominent in Solidarity and were now serving as the country's president and prime minister, respectively.[68] The main point of disagreement was the Kaczyńskis' focus on rooting out those who had been involved in communist rule and their party's attempt to make public all the files of the former communist secret police.[68] Until then only members of the government and parliament had to declare any connection with the former security services.[69] secondnameplaceholder and his supporters argued the so-called transparency legislation advocated by the government might turn into a witch hunt and the more than 500,000 Poles who had possibly collaborated with the communist secret police could face exposure.[69]In 2011, secondnameplaceholder rejected Lithuania's Order of Vytautas the Great as a result of constant discrimination on the part of the Lithuanian government towards its Polish minority.[70]secondnameplaceholder was well known for his conservative stance on LGBT rights. In 2013, he said on Polish television that "he doesn't wish for this minority, which he tolerates and understands, to impose itself on the majority".[71] Referring to Robert Biedroń, he argued that, considering that as they represent less than one percent of the Polish society, proportionally speaking, homosexual MPs should sit "in the last row of the parliament, or even behind its walls". After sharp international criticism, including City authorities of San Francisco's decision to rename Walesa Street as a result of those remarks, secondnameplaceholder apologized for his comments, stressing that "being a man of old date, in his view one's sexual orientation should lie in one's intimate sphere".[72][73] He said that "his intentions were distorted by the media" and "homosexuality should be respected".[74] Over the last few years, secondnameplaceholder has voiced his support for the introduction of same-sex marriage in Poland and has repeatedly met with Biedroń, whom he called "a talent" and "a future President of Poland".[75][76][77]In 2013, secondnameplaceholder suggested the creation of a political union between Poland and Germany.[78]In 2014, in a widely publicized interview, secondnameplaceholder expressed his disappointment in another Nobel laureate, US president Barack Obama: he told CNN, "When he was elected there was great hope in the world. We were hoping that Obama would reclaim moral leadership for America, but that failed ...  in terms of politics and morality America no longer leads the world".[79] secondnameplaceholder also accused Obama of not deserving his Nobel Peace Prize;[28] during the 2012 US presidential campaign he endorsed Obama's opponent Mitt Romney.[80] In September 2015, secondnameplaceholder again hit the headlines after sharing his thoughts on the migrant crisis in Europe with media, saying, "watching the refugees on television, I noticed that ... they are well fed, well dressed and maybe even are richer than we are ... If Europe opens its gates, soon millions will come through and while living among us will start exercising their own customs, including beheading".[28]In August 2017, ten Nobel Peace Prize laureates, including secondnameplaceholder, urged Saudi Arabia to stop the executions of 14 young people for participating in the 2011–12 Saudi Arabian protests.[81]
<h2>Wałęsa and secret police</h2>
Despite the 2000 ruling of a special lustration court affirming his innocence, for many years there have been allegations that secondnameplaceholder was an informant of Służba Bezpieczeństwa, the communist security services, in his twenties.[82] While vehemently denying being a regular SB informer, secondnameplaceholder admitted to "signing something under interrogation in the 1970s."[83] In 2017, a handwriting study ordered by the government-controlled Institute of National Remembrance (INR), stated that signatures on several documents from the 1970s belonged to secondnameplaceholder.[84] The exact nature of secondnameplaceholder's relationship with SB to this day remains a contentious question among historians.[85][86]The controversy resurfaced in 2008 with the publication of a book that purported to show that secondnameplaceholder, codenamed Bolek, had been an operative for the security services from 1970 to 1976.[68]The question resurfaced again in February 2016, when the Institute of National Remembrance seized materials from the widow of Chief of secret police gen. Czesław Kiszczak, that were said to document secondnameplaceholder's role as a spy for the security services.[68]On 12 August 2000, secondnameplaceholder, who was running a presidential campaign at the time, was cleared by the special Lustration Court of charges that he collaborated with the Communist-era secret services and reported on the activities of his fellow shipyard workers, due to the lack of evidence.[87] Anti-communists Piotr Naimski, one of the first members of the Workers' Defense Committee that led to the Solidarity trade union, and Antoni Macierewicz, secondnameplaceholder's former Interior Minister, testified against him in the closed vetting trial. Naimski, who said he testified with a "heavy heart", expressed his disappointment that secondnameplaceholder "made a mistake by not going openly to the public, and he has missed an important chance".[87] According to Naimski, the court cleared secondnameplaceholder on "technical grounds" because it did not find certain original documents—many of which had been destroyed since 1989—that offered sufficient proof that secondnameplaceholder was lying.[87]In 1992, Naimski, as a head of the State Protection Office, started the process of screening people suspected of being Communist collaborators in Poland.[87] In June that year, he helped Antoni Macierewicz prepare a list of 64 members of the government and parliament who were named as spies in the police records; these included secondnameplaceholder, then the Polish president.[87] secondnameplaceholder's name was included on the list after a wrenching internal debate about the virtues of honesty versus political discretion.[87] In response to the publication of this list, President secondnameplaceholder immediately engineered the fall of prime minister Jan Olszewski and the dismissal of Interior Minister Macierewicz.[88] A parliamentary committee later concluded secondnameplaceholder had not signed an agreement with the secret police.[87]A 1997 Polish law made the vetting a requirement for those seeking high public office. According to the law, it is not a crime to have collaborated, but those who deny it and are found to have lied are banned from political life for ten years. The 2000 presidential election was the first use of this law.[87]Despite helping secondnameplaceholder in 2005 to receive the official status of a "victim of communist regime" from the Institute of National Remembrance (IPN),[89] this court ruling did not convince many Poles.[87] In November 2009, secondnameplaceholder sued the president of Poland, firstnameplaceholder Kaczyński, over his repeated collaboration allegations.[90] Five months later, Kaczyński failed to invite secondnameplaceholder to the commemoration service at Katyn, which almost certainly saved secondnameplaceholder's life because the presidential plane crashed, killing all on board.[91] In August 2010, secondnameplaceholder lost a libel case against Krzysztof Wyszkowski, his former fellow activist, who also publicly accused secondnameplaceholder of being a communist agent in 1970s.[92][93]The most comprehensive analysis of secondnameplaceholder's possible collaboration with secret police was provided in a 2008 book The SB (Służba Bezpieczeństwa; secret police) and firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder: A Biographical Contribution (SB a firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder. Przyczynek do biografii).[94] The book was written by two historians from the Institute of National Remembrance, Sławomir Cenckiewicz and Piotr Gontarczyk, and included documents from the archives of the secret police that were inherited by the Institute.[95] Among the documents were registration cards, memos, notes from the secret police, and reports from the informant.[96][97]The book's authors said secondnameplaceholder, working under the code name Bolek,[note 3] was a secret police informant from 1970 (after he was released from the arrest) till 1976 (before he was fired from the shipyard).[98] According to them, "he wrote reports and informed on more than 20 people and some of them were persecuted by the communist police. He identified people and eavesdropped on his colleagues at work while they were listening to Radio Free Europe for example".[99] The book describes the fate of the seven of his alleged victims; information regarding others was destroyed or stolen from the files.[95] According to them, secondnameplaceholder received over 13,000 zlotys as remuneration for his services from the SB, while the monthly salary at the time was about 3,500 zlotys.[note 4][100][101] The authors said oppositionist activity in Poland in the first half of 1970s was minimal and secondnameplaceholder's role in it was quite marginal.[97] However, according to the book, despite formally renouncing his ties with SB in 1976, secondnameplaceholder went on to have contacts with communist officials.[102]The book also said that during his 1990–1995 presidency, secondnameplaceholder used his office to destroy the evidence of his collaboration with secret police by removing incriminating documents from the archives.[97] According to the book, historians discovered that with the help of the state intelligence agency, secondnameplaceholder, Interior Minister Andrzej Milczanowski, and other members of secondnameplaceholder's administration had borrowed from the archives the secret police files that had connections to secondnameplaceholder, and returned them with key pages removed.[95][100] When it was discovered at the turn of 1995/96, the following prosecutorial inquiry was discontinued for political reasons despite the case attracting much public attention.[92][100]Sławomir Cenckiewicz also said that in 1983, when secondnameplaceholder was nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize, the secret police tried to embarrass him and leaked information about secondnameplaceholder's previous collaboration with the government. By this time though, secondnameplaceholder was already so popular that most Poles did not believe the official media and dismissed the allegations as a manipulation by the Communist authorities.[95] The book's first print run sold out in Poland within hours.[103][104] The book received substantial coverage in the media, provoked nationwide debate, and was noted by the international press.[105][106][107] secondnameplaceholder vowed to sue the authors but never did.[104]On 18 February 2016, the government-affiliated INR in Warsaw announced it had seized a package of original documents that allegedly proved secondnameplaceholder was a paid Polish Security Service informant.[108][84] The documents dated from the period 1970–1976; they were seized from the home of a recently deceased former interior minister, General Czesław Kiszczak.[109] The documents' authenticity was confirmed by an archival expert,[109][110] but the prosecutors demanded a handwriting examination.[111] Eventually, the requested examination concluded that the documents were authentic, which suggest he was a paid informant.[84] secondnameplaceholder previously said that he had signed a commitment to inform document, but that he had never acted on it.[84]The dossier consists of two folders. The first is a "personal file" containing 90 pages of documents, including a handwritten commitment to cooperate with Polish Security Service dated 21 December 1970,[112] and signed firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder – Bolek with a pledge he would never admit his collaboration with secret police "not even to family";[113] the file also contains the confirmations of having received funds.[108][109] The second is a "work file" which contains 279 pages of documents, including numerous reports by Bolek on his co-workers at Gdańsk Shipyard, and notes by Security Service officers from meetings with him.[108][109] According to one note, secondnameplaceholder agreed to collaborate out of fear of persecution after the workers' protest in 1970.[112] The documents also show that at first Bolek eagerly provided information on opinions and actions by his co-workers and took money for the information, but his enthusiasm diminished and the quality of his information decreased until he was deemed no longer valuable and collaboration with him was terminated in 1976.[112]The sealed dossier also contained a letter, hand-written by Kiszczak in April 1996, in which he informs the Director of the Polish Central Archives of Modern Records (Archiwum Akt Nowych) about the accompanying files documenting the collaboration of secondnameplaceholder with the Polish Security Service and asks him not to publish this information until five years after secondnameplaceholder's death.[113] In his letter, Kiszczak said he kept the documents out of reach: before the 1989 revolution, trying to protect secondnameplaceholder's reputation; and afterwards to make sure they did not disappear or were used for political reasons.[113] This letter and the accompanying documents had never been sent.[109]On 16 February 2016, about three months after Kiszczak's death, his widow Maria approached the Institute of National Remembrance and offered to sell the documents to the archives for 90,000 zlotys ($23,000).[114] However, according to Polish law, all documents of the political police must be handed in to the state.[114] The administration of the institute notified the prosecutor's office, which conducted a police search of the Kiszczaks' house and seized all the historic documents.[114] Maria Kiszczak later said she had not read her husband's letter and had "made a mistake".[115]For years, secondnameplaceholder vehemently denied collaborating with the Polish Security Service and dismissed the incriminating files as forgeries created by the SB to compromise him.[116] secondnameplaceholder also denies that during his presidency he removed documents incriminating him from the archives.[100] Until 2008, he denied having ever seen his Security Service file.[100] After the publication of the book SB a firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder in 2008, he said that while he was president "I did borrow the file, but didn't remove anything from it. I saw there were some documents there about me and that they were clearly forgeries. I told my secretaries to tape up and seal the file. I wrote 'don't open' on it. But someone didn't obey, removed the papers, now casting suspicion on me."[100][101] secondnameplaceholder's interior minister Andrzej Milczanowski denied the cover-up and said he "had full legal rights to make those documents available to President secondnameplaceholder" and that "no original documents were removed from the file", which contained only photocopies.[100]secondnameplaceholder has offered conflicting statements regarding the authenticity of the documents.[113] Initially he appeared to come close to an admission, saying in 1992, "in December 1970, I signed three or four documents"[92][117] to escape from the secret police.[113] In his 1987 autobiography A Way of Hope,[118] secondnameplaceholder said, "It is also the truth that I had not left that clash completely pure. They gave me a condition: sign! And then I signed."[92] He denied he acted upon the collaboration agreement.[119] However, in his later years secondnameplaceholder said all the documents are forgeries and told the BBC in 2008, "you will not find any signature of mine agreeing to collaborate anywhere".[99][108]In 2009, after the publication of another biography connecting him with the secret police (firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder: Idea and History by Pawel Zyzak),[120] secondnameplaceholder threatened to leave Poland if historians continue to question his past.[121][122] He said that before revealing such information "a historian must decide whether this serves Poland".[121] After the accusations against him resurfaced with the discovery of the Kiszczak dossier on 16 February 2016, secondnameplaceholder called the files "lies, slander and forgeries",[123] and said he "never took money and never made any spoken or written report on anyone".[124] He said of the Polish public, which was about to believe in the allegations, "you have betrayed me, not me you"[115] and "it was I who safely led Poland to a complete victory over communism".[123] On 20 February 2016, secondnameplaceholder wrote in his blog that a secret police officer had begged him to sign the financial documents in the 1970s because the officer had lost money entrusted to him to purchase a vehicle. secondnameplaceholder appealed to the officer to step forward and clear him of the accusations.[125][126]
<h2>Honors</h2>
In 1983, secondnameplaceholder was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.[127] Since then, he has received more than 30 state decorations and more than 50 awards from 30 countries, including Order of the Bath (UK), Order of Merit (Germany), Legion of Honour (France) and European Human Rights Prize (EU 1989).[27] In 2011, he declined to accept the Lithuanian highest order, citing his displeasure at Lithuania's policy towards the Polish diaspora.[128] In 2008, he established the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Award.[63]In 2004, Gdańsk International Airport was officially renamed Gdańsk firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Airport and secondnameplaceholder's signature was incorporated into the airport's logo.[129][130] A college hall in Northeastern Illinois University (Chicago),[131] six streets, and five schools in Canada, France, Sweden and Poland also were named after firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholdersecondnameplaceholder was named Man of the Year by Time magazine (1981),[132] Financial Times (1980), Saudi Gazette (1989) and 12 other newspapers and magazines.[27] He was awarded with over 45 honorary doctorates by universities around the world,[63] including Harvard University and Sorbonne.[127] He was named an honorary karate black belt by International Traditional Karate Federation.[133] secondnameplaceholder is also an honorary citizen of more than 30 cities, including London, Buffalo and Turin.[63]In the United States, secondnameplaceholder was the first recipient of the Liberty Medal, in 1989.[134] That year, he also received the Presidential Medal of Freedom[135] and became the first non-head-of-state to address a joint meeting of the United States Congress.[136] In 2000, secondnameplaceholder received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement.[137] secondnameplaceholder symbolically represented Europe by carrying the Olympic flag at the opening ceremony of the 2002 Winter Olympics.[138] In 2004, he represented ten newly acceded EU countries during the official accession ceremony in Strasbourg.[63] In 1993, the heraldic authority of the Kingdom of Sweden assigned secondnameplaceholder a personal coat of arms on the occasion of his admittance into the Royal Order of the Seraphim.[citation needed]
<h2>Cultural references</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder has been portrayed, as himself or a character based on him, in a number of feature and television films. The two most notable of them are:Both of these films were produced in Poland. In December 1989, Warner Bros. intended to produce a "major" movie about secondnameplaceholder, to be made in 1990 and released in 1991.[141] The company paid secondnameplaceholder a $1 million fee for the rights to produce a biopic.[142] Although the movie was never made, this payment sparked controversy in Poland when five years later it emerged that secondnameplaceholder concealed this income to avoid paying taxes on it.[143] The Gdańsk tax office initiated a tax fraud case against secondnameplaceholder but it was later dismissed because the five-year statute of limitations had already run out.[144]In 1982, Bono was inspired by secondnameplaceholder to write U2's first hit single, "New Year's Day".[146] Coincidentally, the Polish authorities lifted martial law on 1 January 1983, the same day this single was released. secondnameplaceholder also became a hero of a number of Polish pop songs, including a satirical 1991 hit titled Nie wierzcie elektrykom (Don't Trust the Electricians) from the second studio album by the punk rock band Big Cyc which featured a caricature of secondnameplaceholder on its cover.[147]Patrick Dailly's chamber opera Solidarity, starring Kristen Brown as secondnameplaceholder, was premiered by the San Francisco Cabaret Opera in Berkeley, California, in September 2009.[148]Sid Meier's Civilization V video game lists firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder amongst its world leader rankings. secondnameplaceholder is ranked 11th on a scale of 1 to 21, with Augustus Caesar ranked as the best world leader of all time and Dan Quayle as the worst. secondnameplaceholder is immediately outranked by Simon Bolivar and is ranked just above Ivan the Terrible.  firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder ranks 9th out of 21 in Sid Meier's Civilization VI, immediately outranked by Marcus Aurelius and ranked just above Hatshepsut.[citation needed]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder Mpilo secondnameplaceholder OMSG CH GCStJ (born 7 October 1931) is a South African Anglican cleric and theologian, known for his work as an anti-apartheid and human rights activist. He was the Bishop of Johannesburg from 1985 to 1986 and then the Archbishop of Cape Town from 1986 to 1996, in both cases being the first black African to hold the position. Theologically, he sought to fuse ideas from black theology with African theology.secondnameplaceholder was born of mixed Xhosa and Motswana heritage to a poor family in Klerksdorp, Union of South Africa. Entering adulthood, he trained as a teacher and married Nomalizo Leah secondnameplaceholder, with whom he had several children. In 1960, he was ordained as an Anglican priest and in 1962 moved to the United Kingdom to study theology at King's College London. In 1966 he returned to southern Africa, teaching at the Federal Theological Seminary and then the University of Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland. In 1972, he became the Theological Education Fund's director for Africa, a position based in London but necessitating regular tours of the African continent. Back in southern Africa in 1975, he served first as dean of St Mary's Cathedral in Johannesburg and then as Bishop of Lesotho; from 1978 to 1985 he was general-secretary of the South African Council of Churches. He emerged as one of the most prominent opponents of South Africa's apartheid system of racial segregation and white-minority rule. Although warning the National Party government that anger at apartheid would lead to racial violence, as an activist he stressed non-violent protest and foreign economic pressure to bring about universal suffrage.In 1985, secondnameplaceholder became Bishop of Johannesburg and in 1986 the Archbishop of Cape Town, the most senior position in southern Africa's Anglican hierarchy. In this position he emphasised a consensus-building model of leadership and oversaw the introduction of women priests. Also in 1986, he became president of the All Africa Conference of Churches, resulting in further tours of the continent. After President F. W. de Klerk released the anti-apartheid activist Nelson Mandela from prison in 1990 and the pair led negotiations to end apartheid and introduce multi-racial democracy, secondnameplaceholder assisted as a mediator between rival black factions. After the 1994 general election resulted in a coalition government headed by Mandela, the latter selected secondnameplaceholder to chair the Truth and Reconciliation Commission to investigate past human rights abuses committed by both pro and anti-apartheid groups. Since apartheid's fall, secondnameplaceholder has campaigned for gay rights and spoken out on a wide range of subjects, among them the Israel-Palestine conflict, his opposition to the Iraq War, and his criticism of South African presidents Thabo Mbeki and Jacob Zuma. In 2010, he retired from public life.secondnameplaceholder polarised opinion as he rose to notability in the 1970s. White conservatives who supported apartheid despised him, while many white liberals regarded him as too radical; many black radicals accused him of being too moderate and focused on cultivating white goodwill, while Marxist–Leninists criticised his anti-communist stance. He was widely popular among South Africa's black majority, and was internationally praised for his anti-apartheid activism, receiving a range of awards, including the Nobel Peace Prize. He has also compiled several books of his speeches and sermons.firstnameplaceholder Mpilo secondnameplaceholder OMSG CH GCStJ (born 7 October 1931) is a South African Anglican cleric and theologian, known for his work as an anti-apartheid and human rights activist. He was the Bishop of Johannesburg from 1985 to 1986 and then the Archbishop of Cape Town from 1986 to 1996, in both cases being the first black African to hold the position. Theologically, he sought to fuse ideas from black theology with African theology.secondnameplaceholder was born of mixed Xhosa and Motswana heritage to a poor family in Klerksdorp, Union of South Africa. Entering adulthood, he trained as a teacher and married Nomalizo Leah secondnameplaceholder, with whom he had several children. In 1960, he was ordained as an Anglican priest and in 1962 moved to the United Kingdom to study theology at King's College London. In 1966 he returned to southern Africa, teaching at the Federal Theological Seminary and then the University of Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland. In 1972, he became the Theological Education Fund's director for Africa, a position based in London but necessitating regular tours of the African continent. Back in southern Africa in 1975, he served first as dean of St Mary's Cathedral in Johannesburg and then as Bishop of Lesotho; from 1978 to 1985 he was general-secretary of the South African Council of Churches. He emerged as one of the most prominent opponents of South Africa's apartheid system of racial segregation and white-minority rule. Although warning the National Party government that anger at apartheid would lead to racial violence, as an activist he stressed non-violent protest and foreign economic pressure to bring about universal suffrage.In 1985, secondnameplaceholder became Bishop of Johannesburg and in 1986 the Archbishop of Cape Town, the most senior position in southern Africa's Anglican hierarchy. In this position he emphasised a consensus-building model of leadership and oversaw the introduction of women priests. Also in 1986, he became president of the All Africa Conference of Churches, resulting in further tours of the continent. After President F. W. de Klerk released the anti-apartheid activist Nelson Mandela from prison in 1990 and the pair led negotiations to end apartheid and introduce multi-racial democracy, secondnameplaceholder assisted as a mediator between rival black factions. After the 1994 general election resulted in a coalition government headed by Mandela, the latter selected secondnameplaceholder to chair the Truth and Reconciliation Commission to investigate past human rights abuses committed by both pro and anti-apartheid groups. Since apartheid's fall, secondnameplaceholder has campaigned for gay rights and spoken out on a wide range of subjects, among them the Israel-Palestine conflict, his opposition to the Iraq War, and his criticism of South African presidents Thabo Mbeki and Jacob Zuma. In 2010, he retired from public life.secondnameplaceholder polarised opinion as he rose to notability in the 1970s. White conservatives who supported apartheid despised him, while many white liberals regarded him as too radical; many black radicals accused him of being too moderate and focused on cultivating white goodwill, while Marxist–Leninists criticised his anti-communist stance. He was widely popular among South Africa's black majority, and was internationally praised for his anti-apartheid activism, receiving a range of awards, including the Nobel Peace Prize. He has also compiled several books of his speeches and sermons.
<h2>Early life</h2>
firstnameplaceholder Mpilo secondnameplaceholder was born on 7 October 1931 in Klerksdorp, a city in northwest South Africa.[1] His mother, Allen Dorothea Mavoertsek Mathlare, was born to a Motswana family in Boksburg.[2] His father, Zachariah Zelilo secondnameplaceholder, was from the amaFengu branch of Xhosa and had grown up in Gcuwa, Eastern Cape.[3] At home, the couple both spoke the Xhosa language.[4] Zachariah trained as a primary school teacher at Lovedale college before taking a post in Boksburg, where he married his wife.[5] In the late 1920s, he took a job in Klerksdorp; in the Afrikaaner-founded city, he and his wife resided in the black residential area. Established in 1907, it was then known as the "native location" although was later renamed Makoetend.[6] The native location housed a diverse community; although most residents were Tswana, it also housed Xhosa, Sotho, and a few Indian traders.[7] Zachariah worked as the principal of a Methodist primary school and the family lived in the schoolmaster's house, a small mud-brick building in the yard of the Methodist mission.[8]The secondnameplaceholders were poor;[9] describing his family, secondnameplaceholder later related that "although we weren't affluent, we were not destitute either".[10] secondnameplaceholder had an older sister, Sylvia Funeka, who called him "Mpilo" ("life"), a name given to him by his paternal grandmother.[11] The rest of the family called him "Boy".[12] He was his parent's second son; their firstborn boy, Sipho, had died in infancy.[12] Another daughter, Gloria Lindiwe, would be born after him.[13] secondnameplaceholder was sickly from birth;[14] polio resulted in the atrophy of his right hand,[15] and on one occasion he was hospitalised with serious burns.[16] secondnameplaceholder had a close relationship with his father, although was angered at the latter's heavy drinking, during which he would sometimes beat his wife.[17] The family were initially Methodists and secondnameplaceholder was baptised into the Methodist Church in June 1932.[18] They subsequently changed denominations, first to the African Methodist Episcopal Church and then to the Anglican Church.[19]In 1936, the family moved to Tshing, where Zachariah was employed as the principal of a Methodist school; they lived in a hut in the school yard.[16] There, secondnameplaceholder started his primary education and played football with the other children,[10] also becoming the server at St Francis Anglican Church.[20] He developed a love of reading, particularly enjoying comic books and European fairy tales.[21] Here, he also learned Afrikaans, the main language of the area.[22] It was in Tshing that his parents had a third son, Tamsanqa, who also died in infancy.[10] Around 1941, secondnameplaceholder's mother moved to Witwatersrand to work as a cook at Ezenzeleni Blind Institute in western Johannesburg. secondnameplaceholder joined her in the city, first living with an aunt in Roodepoort West before they secured their own house in the township.[23] In Johannesburg, he attended a Methodist primary school before transferring to the Swedish Boarding School (SBS) in the St Agnes Mission.[24] Several months later, he moved with his father to Ermelo, eastern Transvaal.[25] After six months, the duo returned to live with the rest of the family in Roodepoort West, where secondnameplaceholder resuming his studies at SBS.[25] He had pursued his interest in Christianity and at the age of 12 underwent confirmation at St Mary's Church, Roodepoort.[26]secondnameplaceholder failed the arithmetic component of his primary school exam, but despite this, his father secured him entry to the Johannesburg Bantu High School in 1945, where he excelled academically.[27] There, he joined a school rugby team, developing a lifelong love of the sport.[28] Outside of school, he earned money selling oranges and as a caddie for white golfers.[29] To avoid the expense of a daily train commute to school, he briefly lived with family nearer to Johannesburg, before moving back in with his parents when they relocated to Munsieville.[30] He then returned to Johannesburg by moving into a hostel that was part of the Anglican complex surrounding the Church of Christ the King in Sophiatown.[31] He became a server at the church and came under the influence of its priest, Trevor Huddleston;[32] later biographer Shirley du Boulay suggested that Huddleston was "the greatest single influence" in secondnameplaceholder's life.[33] In 1947, secondnameplaceholder contracted tuberculosis and was hospitalised in Rietfontein for 18 months, during which he spent much of his time reading and was regularly visited by Huddleston.[34] In the hospital, he underwent a circumcision to mark his transition to manhood.[35] He returned to school in 1949 and took his national exams in late 1950, gaining a second-class pass.[36]Wanting to become a doctor, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder secured admission to study medicine at the University of the Witwatersrand; however, his parents could not afford the tuition fees.[36] Instead, he turned toward teaching, gaining a government scholarship to start a course at Pretoria Bantu Normal College, a teacher training institution, in 1951.[37] There, he served as treasurer of the Student Representative Council, helped to organise the Literacy and Dramatic Society, and chaired the Cultural and Debating Society for two years.[38] It was during one local debating event that he first met the lawyer—and future president of South Africa—Nelson Mandela; the latter did not remember the meeting and they would not encounter each other again until 1990.[39] At the college, secondnameplaceholder attained his Transvaal Bantu Teachers Diploma, having gained advice about taking exams from the activist Robert Sobukwe.[40] He had also taken five correspondence courses provided by the University of South Africa (UNISA), graduating in the same class as future Zimbabwean leader Robert Mugabe.[41]In 1954, he began teaching English at Madibane High School; the following year, he transferred to the Krugersdorp High School, where he taught English and history.[42] He began courting Nomalizo Leah Shenxane, a friend of his sister Gloria who was studying to become a primary school teacher.[43] They were legally married at Krugersdorp Native Commissioner's Court in June 1955, before undergoing a Roman Catholic wedding ceremony at the Church of Mary Queen of Apostles; although he was an Anglican, secondnameplaceholder had agreed to the ceremony due to Leah's Roman Catholic faith.[44] The newly married couple initially lived in a room at secondnameplaceholder's parental home before renting their own home six months later.[45] Their first child, Trevor, was born in April 1956;[46] their first daughter, Thandeka, appeared 16 months later.[47] The couple worshipped at St Paul's Church, where secondnameplaceholder volunteered as a Sunday school teacher, assistant choirmaster, church councillor, lay preacher, and sub-deacon,[47] while outside of the church he also volunteered as a football administrator for a local team.[45]In 1953, the white-minority National Party government had introduced the Bantu Education Act as a means of furthering their apartheid system of racial segregation and white domination; both secondnameplaceholder and his wife disliked these changes and decided to leave the teaching profession.[48] With Huddleston's support, secondnameplaceholder left the teaching profession to become an Anglican priest.[49] In January 1956, his request to join the Ordinands Guild was turned down due to the debts he had accrued; these were then paid off by the wealthy industrialist and philanthropist Harry Oppenheimer.[50] secondnameplaceholder was admitted to St Peter's Theological College in Rosettenville, Johannesburg, which was run by the Anglican Community of the Resurrection.[51] The college was residential, and secondnameplaceholder lived there while his wife moved to train as a nurse in Sekhukhuneland and his children lived with his parents in Munsieville.[52] In August 1960, his wife gave birth to another daughter, Naomi.[53]At the college, secondnameplaceholder studied the Bible, Anglican doctrine, church history, and Christian ethics,[54] earning a Licentiate of Theology degree.[55] The college's principal, Godfrey Pawson, wrote that secondnameplaceholder "has exceptional knowledge and intelligence and is very industrious. At the same time he shows no arrogance, mixes in well and is popular... He has obvious gifts of leadership."[56] He won the archbishop's annual essay prize for his discussion of Christianity and Islam.[57] During his years at the college, there had been an intensification in anti-apartheid activism in South Africa, accompanied by a growing government crackdown on this dissent; in March 1960 several hundred casualties resulted from the Sharpeville massacre.[58] secondnameplaceholder and his other trainees did not mobilise in support of the anti-apartheid movement;[59] he later noted that "we were in some ways a very apolitical bunch".[60]In December 1960, Edward Paget ordained secondnameplaceholder as an Anglican priest at St Mary's Cathedral.[61] secondnameplaceholder was then appointed assistant curate in St Alban's Parish, Benoni, where he was reunited with his wife and children; they lived in a converted garage.[62] He earned 72.50 rand a month, which was two-thirds of what his white counterparts were given.[63] In 1962, secondnameplaceholder was transferred to St Philip's Church in Thokoza, where he was placed in charge of the congregation and developed a passion for pastoral ministry.[64] Many in South Africa's white-dominated Anglican establishment felt the need for a greater number of indigenous Africans in positions of ecclesiastical authority; to assist in this, Aelfred Stubbs proposed that secondnameplaceholder be trained as a theology teacher at King's College London.[65] Funding was secured from the International Missionary Council's Theological Education Fund (TEF),[66] and the government agreed to give the secondnameplaceholders permission to move to Britain.[67] They duly did so in September 1962.[68] secondnameplaceholder was awarded Bachelor of Divinity in 1965 and Master of Theology in 1966, both from University of London.At KCL's theology department, secondnameplaceholder studied under theologians like Dennis Nineham, Christopher Evans, Sydney Evans, Geoffrey Parrinder, and Eric Mascall.[69] In London, the secondnameplaceholders felt liberated experiencing a life free from apartheid and the pass laws of South Africa;[70] he later noted that "there is racism in England, but we were not exposed to it".[71] He was also impressed by the freedom of speech available in the country, especially that at Speakers' Corner.[72] The family moved into the curate's flat behind the Church of St Alban the Martyr in Golders Green; they were allowed to live rent-free on the condition that secondnameplaceholder assisted Sunday services, the first time that he had ministered to a white congregation.[73] It was in the flat that a daughter, Mpho Andrea secondnameplaceholder, was born in 1963.[74] secondnameplaceholder was academically successful and his tutors suggested that he convert to an honours degree, which entailed him also studying Hebrew.[75] He received his degree from Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother in a ceremony held at the Royal Albert Hall.[76]Nearing the end of his undergraduate studies, he decided to continue on to a master's degree, securing a TEF grant to fund it;[77] he studied for this degree from October 1965 until September 1966, completing his dissertation on Islam in West Africa.[78] During this period, the family moved from Golders Green to Bletchingley in Surrey, where secondnameplaceholder worked as the assistant curate of St Mary's Church.[79] In the village, he encouraged cooperation between his Anglican parishioners and the local Roman Catholic and Methodist communities.[80] secondnameplaceholder's time in London helped him to jettison any bitterness to whites and feelings of racial inferiority; he overcame his habit of automatically deferring to whites.[81]
<h2>Career during apartheid</h2>
In 1966, the secondnameplaceholders left the UK and travelled, via Paris and Rome, to East Jerusalem.[82] Spending two months in the city, secondnameplaceholder studied Arabic and Greek at St George's College.[83] He was shocked at the level of tension between the city's Jewish and Arab citizens.[84] From there, the family returned to South Africa, spending Christmas with family in Witwatersrand.[85] They found it difficult readjusting to a society where they were impacted by segregation and pass laws.[86] He explored the possibility on conducting a PhD at UNISA, on the subject of Moses in the Quran, but this project never materialised.[87] In 1967 they proceeded to Alice, Eastern Cape, where the Federal Theological Seminary (Fedsem) had recently been established, an amalgamation of training institutions from different Christian denominations.[88] There, secondnameplaceholder was employed teaching doctrine, the Old Testament, and Greek.[89] secondnameplaceholder was the college's first black staff-member, with most of the others being European or American expatriates.[90] The campus allowed a level of racial-mixing which was absent in most of South African society.[91] Leah also gained employment there, as a library assistant.[92] They sent their children to a private boarding school in Swaziland, thereby ensuring that they were not instructed under the government's Bantu Education syllabus.[93]While at St Peter's, secondnameplaceholder had also joined a pan-Protestant group, the Church Unity Commission, and served as a delegate at Anglican-Catholic conversations in southern Africa.[94] It was also at this point that he began publishing in academic journals and journals of current affairs.[94] secondnameplaceholder was also appointed as the Anglican chaplain to the neighbouring University of Fort Hare.[95] In an unusual move for the time, he invited female students to become servers during the Eucharist alongside their male counterparts.[96] He joined Anglican student delegations to meetings of the Anglican Students' Federation and the University Christian Movement.[97] It was from this environment that the Black Consciousness Movement emerged under the leadership of figures like Steve Biko and Barney Pityana; although not averse to working with other racial groups to fight apartheid, as the exponents of Black Consciousness often were, secondnameplaceholder was supportive of the movement's efforts.[98] In August 1968, he gave a sermon comparing the situation in South Africa with that in the Eastern Bloc, likening anti-apartheid protests to the recent Prague Spring.[99] In September, Fort Hare students held a sit-in protest at the university administration's policies; after they were surrounded by police with dogs, secondnameplaceholder waded into the crowd to pray with the protesters.[100] This was the first time that he had witnessed state power used to suppress dissent, and he cried during public prayers the next day.[101]Although plans were afoot for secondnameplaceholder to become Vice Principal of Fedsem, he decided to leave the seminary to accept a teaching post at the University of Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland (UBLS) in Roma, Lesotho.[102] The new position allowed him to live closer to his children and offered twice the salary he earned at Fedsem.[103] In January 1970, he and his wife moved to the UBLS campus; most of his fellow staff members were white expatriates from the U.S. or Britain although the university's policy was non-racial and inclusive.[104] As well as his teaching position, he also became the college's Anglican chaplain and the warden of two student residences.[105] In Lesotho, he joined the executive board of the Lesotho Ecumenical Association and served as an external examiner for both Fedsem and Rhodes University.[94] He returned to South Africa on several occasions, including to visit his father shortly before the latter's death in February 1971.[94]The TEF offered secondnameplaceholder a job as their director for Africa, a position that would require relocating to London. secondnameplaceholder agreed, although was initially refused permission to leave by the South African authorities; they regarded him with suspicion ever since his involvement in the Fort Hare student protests and were also increasingly antagonistic toward the WCC, which ran the TEF, because it had condemned apartheid as un-Christian. After secondnameplaceholder insisted that taking the position would be good publicity for South Africa, the authorities relented.[107] In March 1972, he returned to Britain. The TEF's headquarters were in Bromley, a town in the southeast of the city, with the secondnameplaceholder family settling in nearby Grove Park, where secondnameplaceholder became honorary curate of St Augustine's Church.[108]secondnameplaceholder's job entailed assessing grants to theological training institutions and students.[109] This required him touring much of Africa in the early 1970s, and he wrote accounts of his experiences.[110] In Zaire, he for instance lamented the widespread corruption and poverty, while complaining that Mobutu Sese Seko's "military regime... is extremely galling to a black from South Africa".[111] In Nigeria, he first witnessed the interaction between Christians and Muslims in real life, and expressed concern at the Igbo people's resentment following the crushing of their Republic of Biafra.[112] In 1972 he travelled around East Africa, where he was impressed by Jomo Kenyatta's Kenyan government and witnessed Idi Amin's expulsion of Ugandan Asians.[113] Back in England, he experienced one of his only racist encounters in the country when a stranger told him "You bastard, get back to Uganda", mistaking him for a Ugandan Asian refugee.[114] He also acknowledged that he retained his own subconscious anti-black racist thoughts; when on a Nigerian plane, he felt a "nagging worry" on discovering that both pilot and co-pilot were black, having been conditioned to thinking that only whites could be entrusted with such positions of responsibility.[115]During the early 1970s, secondnameplaceholder's theology fundamentally changed as a result both of his experiences in Africa and his discovery of liberation theology, a term coined in 1971 by the Peruvian priest Gustavo Gutiérrez and introduced to secondnameplaceholder by the TEF's associate director for Latin America, Aharon Sapsezian.[116] On discovering black theology, he had been immediately attracted to it,[117] in 1973 attending a conference on the subject at New York City's Union Theological Seminary.[118] There, he presented a paper in which he stated that "black theology is an engaged not an academic, detached theology. It is a gut level theology, relating to the real concerns, the life and death issues of the black man."[119] He stated that his paper was not an attempt to demonstrate the academic respectability of black theology but rather to make "a straightforward, perhaps shrill, statement about an existent. Black theology is. No permission is being requested for it to come into being... Frankly the time has passed when we will wait for the white man to give us permission to do our thing. Whether or not he accepts the intellectual respectability of our activity is largely irrelevant. We will proceed regardless."[120] secondnameplaceholder sought to fuse the African-American derived black theology with African theology, an approach which contrasted with that of other African theologians like John Mbiti who regarded black theology as a foreign import not relevant to the African situation.[118]In 1975, secondnameplaceholder was nominated to be the new Bishop of Johannesburg, although lost out to Timothy Bavin.[121] Bavin suggested that secondnameplaceholder take his newly vacated position, that of the dean of St Mary's Cathedral, Johannesburg. secondnameplaceholder was elected to this position—the fourth highest in South Africa's Anglican hierarchy—in March 1975, becoming the first black man to do so, an appointment making headline news in South Africa.[122] secondnameplaceholder decided to return to South Africa, a decision opposed by Leah, resulting in a strain on their marriage.[123] secondnameplaceholder was officially installed as dean in an August 1975 ceremony. The cathedral was packed for the event; in attendance was the TEF's chairman, Archbishop Karekin Sarkissian of the Armenian Orthodox Church.[124] Moving to the city, secondnameplaceholder lived not in the official dean's residence in the white suburb of Houghton but rather in a house on a middle-class street in the Orlando West township of Soweto, a largely impoverished area for blacks.[125] The cathedral's congregation was racially mixed but with a white majority; this mixing gave secondnameplaceholder hope that a racially equal, de-segregated future was possible for South Africa.[126] He attempted to modernise the liturgies used by the cathedral's congregation although found that this was not desired by most.[127] He also divided opinion among the congregation for his support of the ordination of women and for replacing masculine pronouns with gender neutral ones in his sermons and liturgy.[128]secondnameplaceholder used his position to speak out about what he regarded as social injustice.[129] He met with Black Consciousness Movement figures like Mamphela Ramphele and Soweto community leaders like Nthano Motlana,[130] and publicly endorsed international economic boycott of South Africa over its apartheid policy.[131] He opposed the government's Terrorism Act, 1967 and shared a platform with anti-apartheid campaigner Winnie Mandela in condemning it.[132] He held a 24-hour vigil for racial harmony at the cathedral where he included special prayers for those activists detained under the act.[133] In May 1976, he wrote a letter to Prime Minister B. J. Vorster, urging him to dismantle apartheid and warning that if the government continued enforcing this policy then the country would erupt in racial violence.[134] Six weeks later, the Soweto uprising broke out as black youth protesting the introduction of Afrikaans as the mandatory language of instruction clashed with police. Over the course of ten months, at least 660 were killed, the majority of them under the age of 24.[135] secondnameplaceholder was upset by what he regarded as the lack of outrage from South Africa's white community; he raised the issue in his Sunday sermon, stating that the white silence was "deafening" and asking if they would have shown the same nonchalance had the school children killed by police and pro-government paramilitaries been white.[136]secondnameplaceholder had been scheduled to serve a seven-year term as dean, however after seven months he was nominated as a candidate in an election for the position of Bishop of Lesotho.[137] Although secondnameplaceholder stipulated that he did not want the position, he was elected to the position regardless in March 1976, at which he reluctantly accepted it.[138] This decision upset some of his congregation, who felt that he had used their parish as a stepping stone for his personal career advancement.[139] In July, Bill Burnett consecrated secondnameplaceholder as a bishop at St Mary's Cathedral.[140] In August, secondnameplaceholder was enthroned as the Bishop of Lesotho in a ceremony at Maseru's Cathedral of St Mary and St James; thousands attended, including King Moshoeshoe II and Prime Minister Leabua Jonathan.[140] In this position, he travelled around the diocese, often visiting parishes in the mountains.[141] He learned the Sesotho language and developed a deep affection for the country.[142] He appointed Philip Mokuku as the first dean of the diocese and placed great emphasis on further education for the Basotho clergy.[143] He befriended the royal family although his relationship with Jonathan's right-wing government, of which he disapproved, was strained.[144] In September 1977 he returned to South Africa after being invited to speak at the Eastern Cape funeral of Black Consciousness activist Steve Biko, who had been killed by police while in their custody.[145] At the funeral, secondnameplaceholder stated that Black Consciousness was "a movement by which God, through Steve, sought to awaken in the black person a sense of his intrinsic value and worth as a child of God".[146]After John Rees stepped down as general secretary of the South African Council of Churches, secondnameplaceholder was among the nominees for his successor. John Thorne was ultimately elected to the position, although stepped down from the position after three months. secondnameplaceholder was nominated once more, this time being selected. secondnameplaceholder was unsure whether to accept, but agreed to do so at the urging of the synod of bishops.[148] His decision angered many Anglicans in Lesotho, who felt that secondnameplaceholder was abandoning them.[149] secondnameplaceholder took charge of the SACC in March 1978.[150] Returning to Johannesburg—where the SACC's headquarters were based at Khotso House[151]—the secondnameplaceholders returned to their former Orlando West home, now bought for them by an anonymous foreign donor.[152] Leah gained employment as the assistant director of the Institute of Race Relations.[153]secondnameplaceholder was the SACC's first black leader,[154] and at the time, the SACC was one of the only Christian institutions in South Africa where black people had the majority representation.[155] There, he introduced a schedule of daily staff prayers, regular Bible study, monthly Eucharist, and silent retreats.[156] He also developed a new style of leadership, appointing senior staff who were capable of taking the initiative, delegating much of the SACC's detailed work to them, and keeping in touch with them through meetings and memorandums.[157] Many of his staff referred to him as "Baba" (father).[158] He was determined that the SACC become one of South Africa's most visible human rights advocacy organisations, a course which would anger the government.[154] His efforts gained him international recognition; in 1978 Kings College London at University of London elected him a fellow while the University of Kent and General Theological Seminary gave him honorary doctorates; the following year Harvard University also gave him an honorary doctorate.[159]As head of the SACC, secondnameplaceholder's time was dominated by fundraising efforts, particularly attempts to secure funds from overseas to pay for the organisation's various projects.[160] While secondnameplaceholder was in charge of the SACC, it was revealed that one of its divisional directors had been stealing funds. In November 1981 an all-white government commission was launched to investigate the issue, headed by the judge C. F. Eloff.[161] secondnameplaceholder gave evidence to the commission, during which he criticised apartheid as "evil" and "unchristian".[162] When the Eloff report was published, secondnameplaceholder criticised it, focusing particularly on the absence of any theologians on its board, likening it to "a group of blind men" judging the Chelsea Flower Show.[163] secondnameplaceholder also missed pastoral work, and in 1981 also became the rector of St Augustine's Church in Soweto's Orlando West.[164] He also began collecting some of his sermons and speeches, publishing them in a collection titled Crying in the Wilderness: The Struggle for Justice in South Africa in 1982.[165] This was followed by another collected volume, Hope and Suffering, in 1984.[165]During this period, he testified on behalf of a captured cell of the Umkhonto we Sizwe, an armed anti-apartheid group linked to the banned African National Congress (ANC). He stated that although he was committed to non-violence and censured those on all sides who used violence, he could understand why other black Africans would turn towards it when all their non-violent tactics had proved fruitless in overturning apartheid.[166] In an earlier address, he had expressed the view that an armed struggle against the South African government had little chance of succeeding but also called out Western nations for hypocrisy, noting that they were condemning armed liberation groups in southern Africa while they had praised armed liberation groups operating in Europe during the Second World War.[167]After secondnameplaceholder told Danish journalists that he supported an international economic boycott of South Africa, he was called before two government ministers to be reprimanded in October 1979.[170] In March 1980, the government confiscated his passport, an act which raised his international profile and brought condemnations from the US State Department and senior Anglicans like Robert Runcie.[171] secondnameplaceholder also signed a petition calling for the release of Mandela, an imprisoned anti-apartheid activist; Mandela's freedom was not yet an international cause célèbre.[172] This led to a correspondence between the two men.[173] In 1980, the SACC committed itself to supporting civil disobedience against South Africa's racial laws.[174] After Thorne was arrested in May, secondnameplaceholder and Joe Wing led a march of protest, during which they were arrested by riot police, imprisoned overnight, and fined.[175] The authorities confiscated secondnameplaceholder's passport.[176] In the aftermath of the incident, a meeting was organised between 20 church leaders, including secondnameplaceholder, Prime Minister of South Africa P. W. Botha, and seven government ministers. At this August meeting the clerical leaders unsuccessfully urged the government to dismantle the apartheid laws.[177] Some of the clergy saw this dialogue with the government as pointless, but secondnameplaceholder disagreed, noting that "Moses went to Pharaoh repeatedly to secure the release of the Israelites".[178]In January 1981, the government returned secondnameplaceholder's passport to him.[179] In March, he embarked on a five-week visit to ten countries in Europe and North America, meeting politicians including the UN Secretary General Kurt Waldheim, and addressing the UN Special Committee Against Apartheid.[180] In the UK, he met Runcie gave a sermon in Westminster Abbey, while in Rome he spent a few minutes with Pope John Paul II.[181] On his return to South Africa, Botha again ordered his passport confiscated, preventing secondnameplaceholder from personally collecting several further honorary degrees.[182] It was returned to him 17 months later.[183] In September 1982 he addressed the Triennial Convention of the Episcopal Church in New Orleans before traveling to Kentucky to see his daughter Naomi, who lived there with her American husband.[184] He was troubled that President Ronald Reagan adopted a warmer relationship with the South African government than his predecessor Jimmy Carter, relating that Reagan's government was "an unmitigated disaster for us blacks".[185] secondnameplaceholder gained a popular following in the US, where he was often compared to civil rights leader Martin Luther King Jr., although white conservatives like Pat Buchanan and Jerry Falwell lambasted him as an alleged communist sympathiser.[186]By the 1980s, secondnameplaceholder had become an icon for many black South Africans, his stature among them rivalled only by Mandela.[188] In August 1983, South Africans opposed to apartheid formed the United Democratic Front (UDF), with secondnameplaceholder selected as one of the organisation's patrons.[189] Conversely, he angered the government as well as much of the press and white public.[190] Most of his critics were conservative whites who did not want apartheid to end.[190] He was criticised in pro-government press outlets like The Citizen and the South African Broadcasting Corporation,[191] with this criticism often centering on how his middle-class lifestyle contrasted with the poverty of the blacks he claimed to represent.[192] He received hate mail as well as death threats from white far-right groups like the Wit Wolwe.[193] His rhetoric of angry defiance against the government alienated many white liberals, who believed that apartheid could be gradually reformed away; among the white liberals who publicly criticised secondnameplaceholder were Alan Paton and Bill Burnett.[194] He nevertheless remained close with other prominent white liberals like Helen Suzman.[195]In 1984, secondnameplaceholder embarked on a three-month sabbatical leave at the General Theological Seminary of the Episcopal Church in New York.[196] In the city, he was invited to address the United Nations Security Council in October,[197] and in December he met the Congressional Black Caucus and the subcommittees on Africa in the House of Representatives and the Senate, urging them to put pressure on South Africa.[198] He was also invited to the White House to visit President Ronald Reagan; he urged Reagan to change his approach to the South African government although was unsuccessful.[199] Referring to Reagan's decision to put Cold War alliances before the rights of black South Africans, secondnameplaceholder later described Reagan as "a racist pure and simple".[169]It was while in New York that secondnameplaceholder was informed that he had won the 1984 Nobel Peace Prize; he had previously been nominated in 1981, 1982, and 1983.[200] When the Nobel Prize selection committee met to decide 1984's award, they agreed that it should go to a South African to recognise the problems in that country, deciding that secondnameplaceholder would be a less controversial choice than other South African nominees Mandela and Mangosuthu Buthelezi.[201] secondnameplaceholder travelled to London, where he gave a public statement dedicating his award to "the little people" in South Africa.[202] In December, he attended the award ceremony in Oslo—which was hampered by a bomb scare—before returning home via Sweden, Denmark, Canada, Tanzania, and Zambia.[203] He shared the $192,000 prize money with his family, SACC staff, and a scholarship fund for South Africans in exile.[204] He was the second South African to receive the award, after Albert Luthuli in 1960.[168] The South African government and mainstream media either downplayed or criticised the award,[205] while the Organisation of African Unity hailed it as evidence of apartheid's impending demise.[206]After Bavin retired as Bishop of Johannesburg, secondnameplaceholder was among five candidates considered as his replacement. An elective assembly met at St Barnabas' College in October 1984 and although secondnameplaceholder was one of the two most popular candidates, the white laity voting bloc consistently voted against his candidature. After a deadlock ensued, a bishops' synod was called to make the final decision; they decided to give the role to secondnameplaceholder.[207] Black Anglicans celebrated, although many of their white co-religionists were angry at the selection.[208] secondnameplaceholder was enthroned as the sixth Bishop of Johannesburg at a ceremony in St Mary's Cathedral in February 1985.[209] He was the first black man to hold the role,[210] and took over the largest diocese in South Africa, comprising 102 parishes and 300,000 Anglican parishioners, approximately 80% of whom were black.[211] In his inaugural sermon, secondnameplaceholder declared that he would call on the international community to introduce punitive economic sanctions against South Africa unless apartheid had not begun to be dismantled within 18 to 24 months.[212] As bishop, he resigned as patron of the UDF.[213]secondnameplaceholder sought to reassure white South Africans that he was not the "horrid ogre" some believed him to be, and as bishop he spent much time visiting white-majority parishes and wooing the support of white Anglicans in his diocese.[215] Some white parishes had withdrawn their diocesan quota in protest at his appointment, but he was able to make up the shortfall by attracting foreign donations.[216]In the mid-1980s, there were an increasing number of clashes between angry black youths and the security services, resulting in a growing death toll; secondnameplaceholder was invited to speak at many of their funerals, which attracted crowds of thousands.[217] At a funeral in Duduza, he stepped in to prevent members of the crowd from killing a black man suspected to be a government informant.[218] He spoke out against the torture and killing of suspected collaborators, angering some of those in the black community.[219] For these young militants, secondnameplaceholder and his calls for non-violence were perceived as an obstacle on the path to revolution;[220] one young woman was quoted as saying that secondnameplaceholder was "too moderate for most of us, too much within the system".[220] When secondnameplaceholder accompanied the U.S. politician Ted Kennedy on the latter's speaking tour of South Africa in January 1985, he was angered and humiliated that protesters from the Azanian People's Organisation (AZAPO)—who regarded Kennedy as an agent of capitalism and American imperialism—repeatedly disrupted proceedings.[221]Amid the violence, the ANC called on black South Africans to make the country "ungovernable",[222] while foreign companies increasingly disinvested in the country and the rand reached a record low.[223] In July 1985, Botha declared a state of emergency in 36 magisterial districts, further suspending civil liberties and giving the security services additional powers;[224] secondnameplaceholder criticised this, and offered to serve as a go-between for the government and leading black organisations, but was rebuffed by the former.[225] He also continued with his protests; in April 1985, secondnameplaceholder led a small march of clergy through Johannesburg to protest the arrest of Geoff Moselane.[226] In October 1985, he backed the National Initiative for Reconciliation's proposal for people to refrain from work and engage in a day of prayer, fasting and mourning.[227] He also proposed a national strike against apartheid, angering trade unions whom he had not consulted about such an idea.[228]secondnameplaceholder had continued to make foreign visits to promote his cause. In May he embarked on a speaking tour of the U.S.,[229] and in October 1985 addressed the political committee of the United Nations General Assembly urging that the international community impose sanctions on South Africa if apartheid was not dismantled within six months.[230] He proceeded to the United Kingdom, where he met with Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher.[231] He also announced the formation of a Bishop secondnameplaceholder Scholarship Fund to financially assist South African students living in exile.[232] He returned to the U.S. in May 1986,[94] and in August 1986 visited Japan, China, and Jamaica to promote sanctions.[233] Given that most senior anti-apartheid activists were imprisoned, Mandela referred to secondnameplaceholder as "public enemy number one for the powers that be".[234]After Philip Russell announced his retirement as the Archbishop of Cape Town,[235] in February 1986 the Black Solidarity Group formed a plan to get secondnameplaceholder appointed as his replacement.[236] At the time of the meeting, secondnameplaceholder was in Atlanta, Georgia receiving the Martin Luther King, Jr. Nonviolent Peace Prize.[237] secondnameplaceholder's name was put forward for the position alongside that of Michael Nuttall, although both expressed hesitation at the nomination. In the vote, secondnameplaceholder secured a two-thirds majority from both the clergy and laity and was then ratified in a unanimous vote by the synod of bishops.[238] He was the first black man to hold the post.[235] Some white Anglicans left the church in protest at his election.[239] Over 1300 people attended his enthronement ceremony, which was held on 7 September 1986 at the Cathedral of St George the Martyr.[240] After the ceremony, secondnameplaceholder held an open-air Eucharist for 10,000 people at the Cape Showgrounds in Goodwood, where he invited Albertina Sisulu and Allan Boesak to give political speeches.[241]On becoming archbishop, he moved into the post's official residence at Bishopscourt. He did so illegally, because he had not sought official permission to reside in what the state allocated as a "white area".[242] He obtained money from the church to oversee renovations of the house,[243] and had a children's playground installed in its ground, opening this and the Bishopscourt swimming pool to members of his diocese.[244] He invited the English priest Francis Cull to set up the Institute of Christian Spirituality at Bishopscourt, with the latter moving into a building in the house's grounds.[245] Such projects led to secondnameplaceholder's ministry taking up an increasingly large portion of the Anglican church's budget, which secondnameplaceholder sought to expand through requesting donations from overseas.[245] Some Anglicans were critical of his spending.[246]His work as archbishop, coupled with his political activism and regular foreign trips, led to him accumulating a vast workload, which he managed with the assistance of his executive officer Njongonkulu Ndungane and with Nuttall, who in 1989 was elected dean of the province.[247] In church meetings, secondnameplaceholder drew upon traditional African custom by adopting a consensus-building model of leadership, seeking to ensure that competing groups in the church reached a compromise and thus all votes would be unanimous rather than divided.[248] He secured approval for the ordination of female priests in the Anglican church, having likened the exclusion of women from the position to the exclusionary system of apartheid.[249] He also appointed gay priests to senior positions and privately—although not at the time publicly—criticised the church's insistence that gay priests remain celibate, regarding it as impractical.[250]Along with Boesak and Stephen Naidoo, secondnameplaceholder became one of the church leaders involved in mediating conflicts between black protesters and the security forces; they for instance worked to avoid clashes at the 1987 funeral of ANC guerrilla Ashley Kriel.[251] In February 1988, the government banned 17 black or multi-racial organisations, including the UDF, and restricted the activities of trade unions. Church leaders organised a protest march, and after that too was banned they established the Committee for the Defense of Democracy. When the group's rally was banned, secondnameplaceholder, Boesak, and Naidoo organised a service at St George's Cathedral to replace it.[252]In March 1988, he took up the cause of the Sharpeville Six who had been sentenced to death; opposed on principle to capital punishment, he called for their lives to be spared.[254] He telephoned representatives of the U.S., British, and German governments urging them to pressure Botha on the issue,[255] and personally met with Botha at the latter's Tuynhuys home to discuss the issue. The two did not get on well, and argued.[256] Botha accused secondnameplaceholder of supporting the ANC's armed campaign; secondnameplaceholder said that while he did not support their use of violence, he supported the ANC's objective of a non-racial, democratic South Africa.[257] The death sentences were ultimately commuted.[258]In May 1988, the government launched a covert campaign against secondnameplaceholder, organised in part by Stratkom wing of the State Security Council.[259] The security police printed leaflets and stickers with anti-secondnameplaceholder slogans while unemployed blacks were paid to protest at the airport when he arrived there.[259] Traffic police arrested Leah and locked her in a cell when she was late to renew her motor vehicle license.[260] Although the security police organised assassination attempts on various anti-apartheid Christian leaders, they later claimed to have never done so for secondnameplaceholder, regarding him as too high-profile.[261]secondnameplaceholder remained actively involved in acts of civil disobedience against the government; he was encouraged by the fact that many whites also took part in these protests.[262] In August 1989 he helped to organise an "Ecumenical Defiance Service" at St George's Cathedral,[263] and shortly after joined protests at segregated beaches outside Cape Town.[264] To mark the sixth anniversary of the UDF's foundation he held a "service of witness" at the cathedral,[265] and in September organised a church memorial for those protesters who had been killed in clashes with the security forces.[266] He organised a protest march through Cape Town for later that month, which the new President F. W. de Klerk agreed to permit; a multi-racial crowd containing an estimated 30,000 people took part.[267] That the march had been permitted inspired similar demonstrations to take place across the country.[268] In October, de Klerk met with secondnameplaceholder, Boesak, and Frank Chikane; secondnameplaceholder was impressed that "we were listened to".[269] In 1994, a further collection of secondnameplaceholder's writings, The Rainbow People of God, was published, and followed the next year with his An African Prayer Book, a collection of prayers from across the continent accompanied by the Archbishop's commentary.[165]In February 1990, de Klerk un-banned political parties like the ANC; secondnameplaceholder phoned him to congratulate him on the move.[270] Shortly after, de Klerk announced that Mandela was to be released from prison. The ANC asked secondnameplaceholder if Mandela and his wife Winnie could stay at Bishopscourt on the first night of his freedom, to which secondnameplaceholder agreed.[271] They met for the first time in 35 years at Cape Town City Hall, where Mandela gave a speech to assembled crowds from the balcony.[272] secondnameplaceholder invited Mandela to attend an Anglican synod of bishops in February 1990, at which the latter described secondnameplaceholder as the "people's archbishop".[273] At that synod, secondnameplaceholder and the bishops decide to call for an end to foreign sanctions once the transition to universal suffrage was "irreversible", urged anti-apartheid groups to end their use of armed struggle, and ban Anglican clergy from belonging to political parties.[274] Many clergy protested about the latter point, particularly as it has been imposed without consultation.[275] secondnameplaceholder publicly defended the decision, stating that if priests openly affiliated with political parties then it would prove divisive, particularly amid the growing violence between the supporters of rival parties throughout South Africa.[276]In March, violence broke out between supporters of the ANC and of Inkatha in kwaZulu; secondnameplaceholder cancelled a visit to the US to join the SACC delegation in talks within Mandela, de Klerk, and Inkatha leader Mangosuthu Buthelezi in Ulundi.[277] Church leaders urged Mandela and Buthelezi to hold a joint rally to quell the violent rivalry between their respective parties.[278] Although secondnameplaceholder's relationship with Buthelezi had always been strained—particularly due to secondnameplaceholder's opposition to Buthelezi's collaboration in the apartheid government's Bantustan system—the clergyman visited Buthelezi on a number of occasions to encourage his involvement in the democratic process.[279] As the ANC-Inkatha violence spread from kwaZulu into the Transvaal, secondnameplaceholder toured affected townships in Witwatersrand, visiting those made homeless and calling for peace.[280] He visited the victims of the massacre at Sebokeng,[281] and later those of the Boipatong massacre.[282]Like many other activists, secondnameplaceholder believed that there was a "third force" stoking the tensions between the ANC and Inkatha; it later emerged that sectors of the intelligence agencies were supplying Inkatha with weapons to weaken the ANC's negotiating position.[283] Unlike some ANC figures, secondnameplaceholder never accused de Klerk of personal complicity in these operations.[284] In November 1990, secondnameplaceholder organised a "summit" at Bishopscourt attended by both church leaders and leaders of political groups like the ANC, PAC, and AZAPO, in which he encouraged them to call on their supporters to avoid violence and allow free political campaigning.[285] After the South African Communist Party leader Chris Hani was assassinated by a white man, secondnameplaceholder served as preacher at Hani's funeral outside Soweto; despite his objections to Hani's Marxist beliefs, secondnameplaceholder had admired him as an activist.[286] Amid these events, secondnameplaceholder had experienced physical exhaustion and ill-health,[287] and he undertook a four-month sabbatical at Emory University's Candler School of Theology in Atlanta, Georgia.[288]secondnameplaceholder had been exhilarated by the prospect that South Africa was transforming towards universal suffrage via a negotiated transition rather than a racial civil war.[289] He allowed his face to be used on posters encouraging South Africans to vote.[290] When the April 1994 multi-racial general election took place, secondnameplaceholder was visibly exuberant, telling reporters that "we are on cloud nine".[291] He voted in Cape Town's Gugulethu township.[291] The ANC won the election and Mandela was declared president, overseeing the formation of a government of national unity.[292] secondnameplaceholder attended Mandela's inauguration ceremony and had been responsible for planning its religious component; secondnameplaceholder had insisted that it be a multi-religious ceremony, with Christian, Muslim, Jewish, and Hindu leaders taking part in prayers and readings.[293]Alongside his domestic work, he also turned his attention to events elsewhere in Africa, and in 1987 gave the keynote speech at the All Africa Conference of Churches (AACC) in Lomé, Togo. There, he called on churches to champion the oppressed throughout the continent, stating that "it pains us to have to admit that there is less freedom and personal liberty in most of Africa now then there was during the much-maligned colonial days."[294] At the conference, he was elected president of the AACC, while José Belo was elected its general-secretary. Calling for an "African renaissance" across the continent, the pair formed a partnership that would last a decade.[295] In 1989 they visited Zaire to encourage the country's churches to distance themselves from Seko's autocratic government.[295] In 1994, he and Belo visited war-torn Liberia in a mission co-organised by the AACC and the Carter Center. There, they met Charles Taylor, but secondnameplaceholder did not trust his promise of a ceasefire.[296] In 1995, Mandela sent secondnameplaceholder to Nigeria to meet with Nigerian military leader Sani Abacha to request the release of imprisoned politicians Moshood Abiola and Olusegun Obasanjo.[297] In July 1995, he visited Rwanda a year after the genocide, where he preached to 10,000 people in Kigali. Drawing on his experiences in South Africa, he called for justice to be tempered with mercy towards the Hutu who had orchestrated the genocide.[298] secondnameplaceholder also travelled to other parts of world, for instance spending March 1989 in Panama and Nicaragua.[299]secondnameplaceholder also spoke out on the Israeli–Palestinian conflict. While in New York in 1989, he had praised God for the creation of the state of Israel and asserted its right to "territorial integrity and fundamental security against attacks from those who deny her right to exist".[300] He visited Palestine Liberation Organization leader Yasser Arafat in Cairo, urging him to accept Israel's existence.[301] At the same time he expressed anger that Israel had supplied military hardware to South Africa during the apartheid era, expressing bemusement as to how the Jewish state could co-operate with a government that had contained many Nazi sympathisers.[302] Referring to the Israeli-occupied territories in the Gaza Strip and West Bank, he stated that there were "deeply, deeply distressing" parallels with the situation in apartheid South Africa.[303] He called for the formation of a distinct Palestinian state,[304] and emphasised that his criticisms were of the Israeli government rather than Jews as a broader group.[305] At the invitation of Palestinian bishop Samir Kafity, he undertook a Christmas pilgrimage to Jerusalem, where he gave a sermon at Shepherd's Field near Bethlehem, in which he called for a two-state solution.[306] On that trip, he also visited the Yad Vashem Holocaust memorial, where he laid a wreath and spoke to journalists on the importance of forgiveness.[307] His calls to forgive those who perpetrated the Holocaust, coupled with his support for a Palestinian state, brought criticism from many Jewish groups across the world.[308] This was exacerbated by the fact that he sought to evade suspicions of anti-Semitism through comments such as "my dentist is a Dr. Cohen".[301]secondnameplaceholder also spoke out regarding The Troubles in Northern Ireland. At the Lambeth conference of 1988, he backed a resolution on the issue which condemned the use of violence by all sides; secondnameplaceholder believed that, given Irish republicans had the right to vote, they had not exhausted peaceful means of bringing about change and thus should not resort to armed struggle.[309] Three years later, he gave a televised service from Dublin's Christ Church Cathedral where he called for negotiations to take place between all factions, including the Irish republican Sinn Féin and the Provisional Irish Republican Army, groups which Thatcher's UK government had refused to engage with.[309] He visited Belfast in 1998 and again in 2001.[304]
<h2>Later life</h2>
In October 1994, secondnameplaceholder announced his intention to retire as archbishop in 1996.[165] Although retired archbishops normally return to the position of bishop, the other bishops bestowed on him a new title: "archbishop emeritus".[310] A farewell ceremony was held at St George's Cathedral in June 1996, attended by senior politicians like Mandela and de Klerk.[310] There, Mandela awarded secondnameplaceholder the Order for Meritorious Service, South Africa's highest honour.[310] secondnameplaceholder was succeeded as archbishop by Ndungane.[311]In January 1997, secondnameplaceholder was diagnosed with prostate cancer and travelled abroad for treatment.[312] He publicly revealed his diagnosis, hoping to encourage other men to go for prostate exams.[313] He faced recurrences of the disease in 1999 and 2006.[314] Back in South Africa, he divided his time between homes in Soweto's Orlando West and Cape Town's Milnerton area.[311] In 2000, he opened an office in Cape Town.[311] In June 2000, the Cape Town-based firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Peace Centre was launched, which in 2003 launched an Emerging Leadership Program.[315]Conscious that his presence in South Africa might overshadow Ndungane, secondnameplaceholder agreed to a two-year visiting professorship at Emory University.[311] This took place between 1998 and 2000, and during the period he wrote a book about the TRC, No Future Without Forgiveness.[316] In early 2002 he taught at the Episcopal Divinity School in Cambridge, Massachusetts.[315] From January to May 2003 he taught at the University of North Carolina.[315] In January 2004, he was visiting professor of postconflict societies at KCL, his alma mater.[315] While in the United States, he signed up with a speakers' agency and travelled widely on speaking engagements; this gave him financial independence in a way that his clerical pension would not.[311] In his speeches, he focused on South Africa's transition from apartheid to universal suffrage, presenting it as a model for other troubled nations to adopt.[317] In the US, he thanked anti-apartheid activists for campaigning for sanctions, also calling for US companies to now invest in South Africa.[318]secondnameplaceholder popularised the term "Rainbow Nation" as a metaphor for post-apartheid South Africa after 1994 under ANC rule.[319] He had first used the metaphor in 1989 when he described a multi-racial protest crowd as the "rainbow people of God".[320] secondnameplaceholder advocated what liberation theologians call "critical solidarity", offering support for pro-democracy forces while reserving the right to criticise his allies.[289] He criticised Mandela on several points, such as his tendency to wear brightly coloured Madiba shirts, which he regarded as inappropriate; Mandela offered the tongue-in-cheek response that it was ironic coming from a man who wore dresses.[321] More serious was secondnameplaceholder's criticism of Mandela's retention of South Africa's apartheid-era armaments industry and the significant pay packet that newly elected members of parliament adopted.[322] Mandela hit back, calling secondnameplaceholder a "populist" and stating that he should have raised these issues privately rather than publicly.[323]A key question facing the post-apartheid government was how they would respond to the various human rights abuses that had been committed over the previous decades by both the state and by anti-apartheid activists. The National Party had wanted a comprehensive amnesty package whereas the ANC wanted trials of former state figures.[324] Alex Boraine helped Mandela's government to draw up legislation for the establishment of a Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC), which was passed by parliament in July 1995.[325] Nuttall suggested that secondnameplaceholder become one of the TRC's seventeen commissioners, while in September a synod of bishops formally nominated him.[326] secondnameplaceholder proposed that the TRC adopt a threefold approach: the first being confession, with those responsible for human rights abuses fully disclosing their activities, the second being forgiveness in the form of a legal amnesty from prosecution, and the third being restitution, with the perpetrators making amends to their victims.[327]Mandela named secondnameplaceholder as the chair of the TRC, with Boraine as his deputy.[328] The commission was a significant undertaking, employing over 300 staff, dividing into three committees, and holding as many as four hearings simultaneously.[329] In the TRC, secondnameplaceholder advocated "restorative justice", something which he considered characteristic of traditional African jurisprudence "in the spirit of ubuntu".[330] As head of the commission, secondnameplaceholder had to deal with its various inter-personal problems, with much suspicion between those on its board who had been anti-apartheid activists and those who had supported the apartheid system.[331] He acknowledged that "we really were like a bunch of prima donnas, frequently hypersensitive, often taking umbrage easily at real or imagined slights".[332] secondnameplaceholder opened meetings with prayers and often referred to Christian teachings when discussing the TRC's work, frustrating some who saw him as incorporating too many religious elements into an expressly secular body.[332]The first hearing took place in April 1996.[332] The hearings were publicly televised and had a considerable impact on South African society.[333] He had very little control over the committee responsible for granting amnesty, instead chairing the committee which heard accounts of human rights abuses perpetrated by both anti-apartheid and apartheid figures.[334] While listening to the testimony of victims, secondnameplaceholder was sometimes overwhelmed by emotion and cried during the hearings.[335] He singled out those victims who expressed forgiveness towards those who had harmed them and used these individuals as his leitmotif.[336] The ANC's image was tarnished by the revelations that some of its activists had engaged in torture, attacks on civilians, and other human rights abuses. It sought to suppress part of the final TRC report, infuriating secondnameplaceholder.[337] He warned of the ANC's "abuse of power", stating that "yesterday's oppressed can quite easily become today's oppressors... We've seen it happen all over the world and we shouldn't be surprised if it happens here".[338] secondnameplaceholder presented the five-volume TRC report to Mandela in a public ceremony in Pretoria in October 1998.[339] Ultimately, secondnameplaceholder was pleased with the TRC's achievement, believing that it would aid long-term reconciliation, although recognised its short-comings.[340]Post-apartheid, secondnameplaceholder's status as a gay rights activist kept him in the public eye more than any other issue facing the Anglican Church.[342] secondnameplaceholder regarded discrimination against homosexuals as being the equivalent to discrimination against black people and women,[342] and his views on this known through speeches and sermons.[343] After the 1998 Lambeth Conference of bishops reaffirmed the church's opposition to same-sex sexual acts, secondnameplaceholder wrote to George Carey stating "I am ashamed to be an Anglican".[344] He regarded the Archbishop of Canterbury Rowan Williams as too accommodating of conservatives who wanted to eject various US and Canadian Anglican churches from the Anglican Communion after they expressed a pro-LGB rights stance.[345] secondnameplaceholder expressed the view that if these conservatives disliked the inclusiveness of the Anglican Communion, they always had "the freedom to leave".[346] In 2007, secondnameplaceholder accused the church of being obsessed with homosexuality and declared: "If God, as they say, is homophobic, I wouldn't worship that God."[347] In 2011, he called on the Anglican Church of Southern Africa to accept and conduct same-sex marriages.[348]secondnameplaceholder also spoke out on the need to combat the HIV/AIDS pandemic, in June 2003 stating that "Apartheid tried to destroy our people and apartheid failed. If we don't act against HIV-AIDS, it may succeed, for it is already decimating our population".[349] On the April 2005 election of Pope Benedict XVI—who was known for his conservative views on issues of gender and sexuality—secondnameplaceholder described it as unfortunate that the Roman Catholic Church was now unlikely to change its opposition to the use of condoms "amidst the fight against HIV/AIDS" nor its opposition to the ordination of women priests.[350] To help combat child trafficking, in 2006 secondnameplaceholder launched a global campaign, organised by the aid organisation Plan, to ensure that all children are registered at birth.[351]secondnameplaceholder retained his interest in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, and after the signing of the Oslo Accords was invited to Tel Aviv to attend the Peres Centre for Peace.[305] He became increasingly frustrated following the collapse of the 2000 Camp David Summit,[305] and in 2002 gave a widely publicised speech denouncing Israeli policy regarding the Palestinians and calling for sanctions against Israel.[305] Comparing the Israeli-Palestinian situation with that in South Africa, he said that "one reason we succeeded in South Africa that is missing in the Middle East is quality of leadership – leaders willing to make unpopular compromises, to go against their own constituencies, because they have the wisdom to see that would ultimately make peace possible."[305] secondnameplaceholder was named to head a United Nations fact-finding mission to Beit Hanoun in the Gaza Strip to investigate the November 2006 incident in which soldiers from the Israel Defense Forces killed 19 civilians.[352] Israeli officials expressed concern that the report would be biased against Israel. secondnameplaceholder cancelled the trip in mid-December, saying that Israel had refused to grant him the necessary travel clearance after more than a week of discussions.[353]In 2003, secondnameplaceholder was the scholar in residence at the University of North Florida.[305] It was there, in February, that he broke his normal rule on not joining protests outside South Africa by taking part in a New York demonstration against plans for the U.S. to launch the Iraq War.[354] He telephoned Condoleezza Rice urging the U.S. government not to go to war without a resolution from the United Nations Security Council.[355] secondnameplaceholder questioned why Iraq was being singled out for allegedly possessing weapons of mass destruction when Europe, India, and Pakistan also had many such devices.[356] In 2004, he appeared in Honor Bound to Defend Freedom, an Off Broadway play in New York City critical of the U.S. detention of prisoners at Guantánamo Bay.[357] In January 2005, he added his voice to the growing dissent over terrorist suspects held at Guantánamo's Camp X-Ray, stating that these detentions without trial were "utterly unacceptable" and comparable to the apartheid-era detentions.[358] He also criticised the UK's introduction of measures to detain terrorist subjects for 28 days without trial.[359]
In 2012, he called for U.S. President George W. Bush and British Prime Minister Tony Blair to be tried by the International Criminal Court for initiating the Iraq War.[360]In 2004, he gave the inaugural lecture at the Church of Christ the King, where he commended the achievements made in South Africa over the previous decade although warned of widening wealth disparity among its population.[361] He questioned the government's spending on armaments, its policy regarding Mugabe's government in Zimbabwe, and the manner in which Nguni-speakers dominated senior positions, stating that this latter issue would stoke ethnic tensions.[361] He made the same points three months later when giving the annual Nelson Mandela Lecture in Johannesburg.[361] There, he charged the ANC under Mbeki's leadership of demanding "sycophantic, obsequious conformity" among its members.[362] secondnameplaceholder and Mbeki had long had a strained relationship; Mbeki had accused secondnameplaceholder of criminalising the ANC's military struggle against apartheid through the TRC, while secondnameplaceholder disliked Mbeki's active neglect of the HIV/AIDS pandemic.[362] Like Mandela before him, Mbeki accused secondnameplaceholder of being a populist, further claiming that the cleric had no understanding of the ANC's inner workings.[362] secondnameplaceholder later criticised ANC leader and South African President Jacob Zuma; in 2006, he criticised Zuma's "moral failings" as a result of accusations of rape and corruption that he was facing.[363] In 2007, he again criticised South Africa's policy of "quiet diplomacy" toward Mugabe's government, calling for the Southern Africa Development Community to chair talks between Mugabe's ZANU-PF and the opposition Movement for Democratic Change, to set firm deadlines for action, with consequences if they were not met.[364] In 2008, he called for a UN Peacekeeping force to be sent to Zimbabwe.[365]Before the 31st G8 summit at Gleneagles, Scotland, in 2005, secondnameplaceholder called on world leaders to promote free trade with poorer countries and to end expensive taxes on anti-AIDS drugs.[366]
In July 2007, secondnameplaceholder was declared Chair of The Elders, a group of world leaders to contribute their wisdom, kindness, leadership and integrity to tackle some of the world's toughest problems.[367] secondnameplaceholder served in this capacity until May 2013. Upon stepping down and becoming an Honorary Elder, he said: "As Elders we should always oppose presidents for Life. After six wonderful years as Chair, I am sad to say that it was time for me to step down."[368] secondnameplaceholder led The Elders' visit to Sudan in October 2007 – their first mission after the group was founded – to foster peace in the Darfur crisis. "Our hope is that we can keep Darfur in the spotlight and spur on governments to help keep peace in the region," said secondnameplaceholder.[369] He has also travelled with Elders delegations to Ivory Coast, Cyprus, Ethiopia, India, South Sudan and the Middle East.[370]During the 2008 Tibetan unrest, secondnameplaceholder marched in a pro-Tibet demonstration in San Francisco; there, he called on heads of states to boycott the 2008 Summer Olympics opening ceremony in Beijing "for the sake of the beautiful people of Tibet".[371] secondnameplaceholder invited the Tibetan Buddhist leader, the 14th Dalai Lama, to attend his 80th birthday in October 2011, although the South African government did not grant him entry; observers suggested that they had not given permission so as not to offend China, a major trading partner.[372]
In 2009, secondnameplaceholder assisted in the establishing of the Solomon Islands' Truth and Reconciliation Commission, modelled after the South African body of the same name.[373] He also attended the 2009 United Nations Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen,[374] and has publicly called for fossil fuel divestment, comparing it to disinvestment from apartheid-era South Africa.[375]In October 2010, secondnameplaceholder announced his retirement from public life so that he could spend more time "at home with my family – reading and writing and praying and thinking".[376] In May 2013, secondnameplaceholder declared that he would no longer vote for the ANC, stating that while the party was "very good at leading us in the struggle to be free from oppression", it had done a poor job in countering inequality, violence, and corruption in South Africa.[377] The following month, he welcomed Raphele's launch of a new party, Agang South Africa.[378] After Mandela died in December 2013, secondnameplaceholder initially stated that he had not been invited to the funeral, but the government denied this and secondnameplaceholder subsequently announced that he would attend.[379] He publicly criticised the memorials held for Mandela, stating that they had given too much prominence to the ANC and that Afrikaners had been marginalised from them, believing that Mandela himself would have been appalled by this.[380]secondnameplaceholder also maintained an interest in social issues. In July 2014, he came out in support of legalised assisted dying, stating that life shouldn't be preserved "at any cost" and that the criminalisation of assisted dying deprived the terminally ill of their "human right to dignity".[381][382] He later stated that he would want that option open to him personally.[383] He reiterated his support for assisted dying legislation in September 2018 following the arrest of assisted dying campaigner Sean Davison.[384] In December 2015, secondnameplaceholder's daughter, Mpho secondnameplaceholder, married a woman, Marceline van Furth, in the Netherlands. secondnameplaceholder attended and gave the proceedings a blessing, in spite of ongoing Anglican opposition to same-sex marriage.[385]secondnameplaceholder also continued to comment on international affairs. In November 2012, he published a letter alongside Mairead Maguire and Adolfo Pérez Esquivel in which they expressed support for U.S. military whistleblower Chelsea Manning and condemned Manning's imprisonment in the U.S.[386] In August 2017, secondnameplaceholder was among ten Nobel Peace Prize laureates who urged Saudi Arabia to stop the executions of 14 young people for participating in the 2011–12 Saudi Arabian protests.[387] In September, secondnameplaceholder asked Myanmar's leader Aung San Suu Kyi, a fellow Nobel Peace Prize laureate, to halt the army's persecution of the country's Muslim Rohingya minority.[388] In December, he was among those to condemn U.S. President Donald Trump's decision to officially recognise Jerusalem as Israel's capital despite opposition from the Palestinians; secondnameplaceholder said that God was weeping at Trump's decision.[389]
<h2>Personal life and personality</h2>
Du Boulay noted that secondnameplaceholder was "a man of many layers" and "contradictory tensions".[391] His personality has been described as warm,[80] exuberant,[80] and outgoing.[392] Du Boulay noted that his "typical African warmth and a spontaneous lack of inhibition" proved shocking to many of the "reticent English" whom he encountered when in England,[393] but that it also meant that he had the "ability to endear himself to virtually everyone who actually meets him".[394]Du Boulay noted that as a child, secondnameplaceholder had been hard-working and "unusually intelligent".[395] She added that he had a "gentle, caring temperament and would have nothing to do with anything that hurt others",[396] commenting on how he had "a quicksilver mind a disarming honesty".[397] secondnameplaceholder was rarely angry in his personal contacts with others, although could become so if he felt that his integrity was being challenged.[157] He had a tendency to be highly trusting, something which some of those close to whom sometimes believed was unwise in various situations.[158] He was also reportedly bad at managing finances and prone to overspending, resulting in accusations of irresponsibility and extravagance.[398]secondnameplaceholder had a passion for preserving African traditions of courtesy.[105] He could be offended by discourteous behaviour and careless language,[392] as well as by swearing and ethnic slurs.[399] He could get very upset if a member of his staff forgot to thank him or did not apologise for being late to a prayer session.[400] He also disliked gossip and discouraged it among his staff.[401] He was very punctual,[402] and insisted on punctuality among those in his employ.[403] Du Boulay noted that "his attention to the detail of people's lives is remarkable", for he would be meticulous in recording and noting people's birthdays and anniversaries.[404] He was attentive to his parishioners, making an effort to regularly visit and spend time with them; this included making an effort to visit parishioners who disliked him.[405]According to Du Boulay, secondnameplaceholder had "a deep need to be loved",[391] a facet that the clergyman recognised about himself and referred to as a "horrible weakness".[400] secondnameplaceholder has also been described as being sensitive,[406] and very easily hurt, an aspect of his personality which he concealed from the public eye;[400] Du Boulay noted that he "reacts to emotional pain" in an "almost childlike way".[407] He never denied being ambitious,[408] and acknowledged that he enjoyed the limelight which his position gave him, something that his wife often teased him about.[409] He was, according to Du Boulay, "a man of passionate emotions" who was quick to both laugh and cry.[400]As well as English, secondnameplaceholder could speak Zulu, Sotho, Tswana, and Xhosa.[402] secondnameplaceholder was often praised for his public speaking abilities; Du Boulay noted that his "star quality enables him to hold an audience spellbound".[410] Gish noted that "secondnameplaceholder's voice and manner could light up an audience; he never sounded puritanical or humourless".[411] Quick witted, he used humour to try and win over audiences.[412] He had a talent for mimicry but, according to Du Boulay, "his humour has none of the cool acerbity that makes for real wit".[413] His application of humour included jokes that made a point about apartheid;[414] "the whites think the black people want to drive them into the sea. What they forget is, with apartheid on the beaches – we can't even go to the sea."[415] In a speech made at the Sixth Assembly of the World Council of Churches in Vancouver, he for instance drew laughs from the audience for referring to South Africa as having a "few local problems".[416]secondnameplaceholder has had a lifelong love of literature and reading,[417] and was a fan of cricket.[418] To relax, he enjoyed listening to classical music and reading books on politics or religion.[419] His favourite foods included samosas, marshmallows, fat cakes, and Yogi Sip.[418] When hosts asked what his culinary tastes were, his wife responded: "think of a five year old".[409] 
secondnameplaceholder awoke at 4 am each morning, before engaging in an early morning walk, prayers, and the Eucharist.[420] On Fridays, he fasted until supper.[421]secondnameplaceholder was a committed Christian since boyhood.[422] Prayer was a big part of his life; he often spent an hour in prayer at the start of each day, and would ensure that every meeting or interview that he was part of was preceded by a short prayer.[423] He was even known to often pray while driving.[423] He reads the Bible every day.[424] secondnameplaceholder says he reads the Bible every day and recommends that people read it as a collection of books, not a single constitutional document: 
"You have to understand is that the Bible is really a library of books and it has different categories of material," he said.
"There are certain parts which you have to say no to. The Bible accepted slavery. St Paul said women should not speak in church at all and there are people who have used that to say women should not be ordained. There are many things that you shouldn't accept."[424]On 2 July 1955, secondnameplaceholder married Nomalizo Leah Shenxane, a teacher whom he had met while at college. They had four children: Trevor Thamsanqa, Theresa Thandeka, Naomi Nontombi and Mpho Andrea, all of whom attended the Waterford Kamhlaba School in Swaziland.[425] Du Boulay referred to him as "a loving and concerned father",[426] while Allen described him as a "loving but strict father" to his children.[153]
<h2>Ideology</h2>
Allen stated that the theme running through secondnameplaceholder's campaigning was that of "democracy, human rights and tolerance, to be achieved by dialogue and accommodation between enemies."[346] Racial equality was a core principle,[427] and his opposition to apartheid was unequivocal.[410] secondnameplaceholder believed that the apartheid system had to be wholly dismantled rather than being reformed in a piecemeal fashion.[428] He compared the apartheid ethos of South Africa's National Party to the ideas of the Nazi Party, and drew comparisons between apartheid policy and the Holocaust. He noted that whereas the latter was a quicker and more efficient way of exterminating whole populations, the National Party's policy of forcibly relocating black South Africans to areas where they lacked access to food and sanitation had much the same result.[429] In his words, "Apartheid is as evil and as vicious as Nazism and Communism".[430]secondnameplaceholder never became anti-white, in part due to his many positive experiences with white people.[431] In his speeches, he stressed that it was apartheid—rather than white people—that was the enemy.[432] He promoted racial reconciliation between South Africa's communities, believing that most blacks fundamentally wanted to live in harmony with whites,[176] although he stressed that reconciliation would only be possible among equals, after blacks had been given full civil rights.[415] He tried to cultivate goodwill from the country's white community, making a point of showing white individuals gratitude when they made concessions to black demands.[176] He also spoke to many white audiences, urging them to support his cause, referring to it as the "winning side",[433] and reminding them that when apartheid had been overthrown, black South Africans would remember who their friends had been.[434] When he held public prayers, he always included mention of those who upheld apartheid, such as politicians and police, alongside the system's victims, emphasising his view that all humans were the children of God.[435] He stated that "the people who are perpetrators of injury in our land are not sporting horns or tails. They're just ordinary people who are scared. Wouldn't you be scared if you were outnumbered five to one?"[436]secondnameplaceholder was always committed to non-violent activism,[437] and in his speeches was also cautious never to threaten or endorse violence, even when he warned that it was a likely outcome of government policy.[438] He nevertheless described himself as a "man of peace" rather than a pacifist.[439] He for instance accepted that violence had been necessary to stop Nazism.[440] In the South African situation, he criticised the use of violence by both the government and anti-apartheid groups, although was also critical of white South Africans who would only condemn the use of violence by the latter, regarding such a position as a case of a double standard.[440] To end apartheid, he advocated foreign economic pressure be put on South Africa.[440] To critics who claimed that this measure would only cause further hardship for impoverished black South Africans, he responded that said communities were already experiencing significant hardship and that it would be better if they were "suffering with a purpose".[441]During the apartheid period, he criticised the black leaders of the Bantustans, describing them as "largely corrupt men looking after their own interests, lining their pockets";[442] Buthelezi, the leader of the Zulu Bantustan, privately claimed that there was "something radically wrong" with secondnameplaceholder's personality.[443] In the 1980s, he also condemned Western political leaders, namely Reagan, Thatcher, and West Germany's Helmut Kohl, for retaining links with the South African government, stipulating that "support of this racist policy is racist".[444] Regarding Reagan, he stated that although he once thought him a "crypto-racist" for his soft stance on the National Party administration, he would "say now that he is a racist pure and simple".[169] He and his wife boycotted a lecture given at the Federal Theological Institute by former British Prime Minister Alec Douglas-Home in the 1960s; secondnameplaceholder noted that they did so because Britain's Conservative Party had "behaved abominably over issues which touched our hearts most nearly".[445] Later in life, he also spoke out against various African leaders, for instance describing Zimbabwe's Robert Mugabe as the "caricature of an African dictator", who had "gone bonkers in a big way".[297]According to Du Boulay, "secondnameplaceholder's politics spring directly and inevitably from his Christianity".[446] He believed that it was the duty of Christians to oppose unjust laws,[147] and that there could be no separation between the religious and the political just as—according to Anglican theology—there is no separation between the spiritual realm (the Holy Ghost) and the material one (Jesus Christ).[447] However, he was adamant that he was not personally a politician.[446] He felt that religious leaders like himself should stay outside of party politics, citing the example of Abel Muzorewa in Zimbabwe, Makarios III in Cyprus, and Ruhollah Khomeini in Iran as examples in which such crossovers proved problematic.[448] He tried to avoid alignment with any particular political party; in the 1980s he for instance signed a plea urging anti-apartheid activists in the United States to support both the ANC and the Pan Africanist Congress (PAC).[449] Du Boulay however noted that secondnameplaceholder was "most at home" with the UDF umbrella organisation,[450] and that his views on a multi-racial alliance against apartheid placed him closer to the approach of the ANC and UDF than the blacks-only approach favoured by the PAC and Black Consciousness groups like AZAPO.[451] When, in the late 1980s, there were suggestions that he should take political office, he rejected the idea.[452]When pressed to describe his ideological position, secondnameplaceholder has described himself as a socialist.[451] In 1986, he related that "[a]ll my experiences with capitalism, I'm afraid, have indicated that it encourages some of the worst features in people. Eat or be eaten. It is underlined by the survival of the fittest. I can't buy that. I mean, maybe it's the awful face of capitalism, but I haven't seen the other face."[453] Also in the 1980s, he was reported as saying that "apartheid has given free enterprise a bad name".[454] While identifying with socialism, he opposed forms of socialism like Marxism-Leninism which promoted communism, being critical of Marxism-Leninism's promotion of atheism.[451] secondnameplaceholder has often used the aphorism that "African communism" is an oxymoron because—in his view—Africans are intrinsically spiritual and this conflicts with the atheistic nature of Marxism.[455] He was critical of the Marxist-Leninist governments in the Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc, comparing the way that they treated their populations with the way that the National Party treated South Africans.[429] In 1985 he stated that he hated Marxism-Leninism "with every fiber of my being" although sought to explain why black South Africans turned to it as an ally: "when you are in a dungeon and a hand is stretched out to free you, you do not ask for the pedigree of the hand owner."[456]Mandela had foregrounded the idea of Ubuntu as being of importance to South Africa's political framework.[457] In 1986, secondnameplaceholder had defined Ubuntu: "It refers to gentleness, to compassion, to hospitality, to openness to others, to vulnerability, to be available to others and to know that you are bound up with them in the bundle of life."[457] Reflecting this view of ubuntu, secondnameplaceholder was fond of the Xhosa saying that "a person is a person through other persons".[402]secondnameplaceholder was attracted to Anglicanism because of what he saw as its tolerance and inclusiveness, its appeal to reason alongside scripture and tradition, and the freedom that its constituent churches had from any centralized authority.[343] secondnameplaceholder's approach to Anglicanism has been characterised as Anglo-Catholic in nature.[458] He regarded the Anglican Communion as a family, replete with its internal squabbles.[459]secondnameplaceholder rejected the idea that any particular variant of theology was universally applicable, instead maintaining that all understandings of God had to be "contextual" in relating to the socio-cultural conditions in which they existed.[460] 
In the 1970s, secondnameplaceholder became an advocate of both black theology and African theology, seeking ways to fuse the two schools of Christian theological thought.[461] Unlike other theologians, like John Mbiti, who saw the traditions as largely incompatible, secondnameplaceholder emphasised the similarities between the two.[462]
He believed that both theological approaches had arisen in contexts where black humanity had been defined in terms of white norms and values, in societies where "to be really human", the black man "had to see himself and to be seen as a chocolate coloured white man."[463] He also argued that both black and African theology shared a repudiation of the supremacy of Western values.[463] In doing so he spoke of an underlying unity of Africans and the African diaspora, stating that "All of us are bound to Mother Africa by invisible but tenacious bonds. She has nurtured the deepest things in us blacks."[462]He became, according to Du Boulay, "one of the most eloquent and persuasive communicators" of black theology.[447] He expressed his views on theology largely through sermons and addresses rather than in extended academic treatises.[447]
secondnameplaceholder expressed the view that Western theology sought answers to questions that Africans were not asking.[464] For secondnameplaceholder, two major questions were being posed by African Christianity: how to replace imported Christian expressions of faith with something authentically African, and how to liberate people from bondage.[465] He believed that there were many comparisons to be made between contemporary African understandings of God and those featured in the Old Testament.[118] He nevertheless criticised African theology for failing to sufficiently address contemporary societal problems, and suggested that to correct this it should learn from the black theology tradition.[463]When chairing the TRC, secondnameplaceholder advocated an explicitly Christian model of reconciliation, as part of which he believed that South Africans had to face up to the damages that they had caused and accept the consequences of their actions.[466] As part of this, he believed that the perpetrators and beneficiaries of apartheid must admit to their actions but that the system's victims should respond generously, stating that it was a "gospel imperative" to forgive.[466] At the same time, he argued that those responsible had to display true repentance in the form of restitution.[466]
<h2>Reception and legacy</h2>
Gish noted that by the time of apartheid's fall, secondnameplaceholder had attained "worldwide respect" for his "uncompromising stand for justice and reconciliation and his unmatched integrity".[467] According to Allen, secondnameplaceholder "made a powerful and unique contribution to publicizing the antiapartheid struggle abroad", particularly in the United States.[468] In the latter country, he was able to rise to prominence as a South African anti-apartheid activist because—unlike Mandela and other members of the ANC—he had no links to the South African Communist Party and thus was more acceptable to Americans amid the Cold War anti-communist sentiment of the period.[469] In the U.S., he was often compared to Martin Luther King, with the African-American civil rights activist Jesse Jackson referring to him as "the Martin Luther King of South Africa"; this was a comparison that secondnameplaceholder was embarrassed by.[470]
After the end of apartheid, secondnameplaceholder became "perhaps the world's most prominent religious leader advocating gay and lesbian rights", according to Allen.[342] Ultimately, Allen thought that perhaps secondnameplaceholder's "greatest legacy" was the fact that he gave "to the world as it entered the twenty-first century an African model for expressing the nature of human community".[471]During secondnameplaceholder's rise to notability during the 1970s and 1980s, responses to him were "sharply polarized".[472] Noting that he was "simultaneously loved and hated, honoured and vilified",[473] Du Boulay attributed his divisive reception to the fact that "strong people evoke strong emotions".[474] secondnameplaceholder gained much adulation from black journalists, inspired imprisoned anti-apartheid activists, and led to many black parents naming their children after him.[472] For many black South Africans, he was a respected religious leader and a symbol of black achievement.[475] By 1984 he was—according to Gish—"the personification of the South African freedom struggle".[412] In 1988, Du Boulay described him as "a spokesman for his people, a voice for the voiceless".[391]The response he received from South Africa's white minority was more mixed. Most of those who criticised him were conservative whites who did not want a shift away from apartheid and white-minority rule.[476] Many of these whites were angered that he was calling for economic sanctions against South Africa and that he was warning that racial violence was impending.[477] Said whites often accused him of being a tool of the communists.[451] This hostility was exacerbated by the government's campaign to discredit secondnameplaceholder and distort his image,[478] which included repeatedly misquoting him to present his statements out of context.[479] According to Du Boulay, the SABC and much of the white press went to "extraordinary attempts to discredit him", something that "made it hard to know the man himself".[391] Allen noted that in 1984, secondnameplaceholder was "the black leader white South Africans most loved to hate" and that this antipathy extended beyond supporters of the far-right government to liberals too.[191] The fact that he was "an object of hate" for many was something that deeply pained him.[474]secondnameplaceholder also drew criticism from within the anti-apartheid movement and the black South African community. He was criticised repeatedly for making statements on behalf of black South Africans without consulting other community leaders first.[394] Some black anti-apartheid activists regarded him as too moderate,[480] and in particular too focused on cultivating white goodwill.[481] The African-American civil rights campaigner Bernice Powell for instance complained that he was "too nice to white people".[482] According to Gish, secondnameplaceholder "faced the perpetual dilemma of all moderates – he was often viewed suspiciously by the two hostile sides he sought to bring together".[481] secondnameplaceholder's critical view of Marxist-oriented communism and the governments of the Eastern Bloc, and the comparisons he drew between these administrations and far-right ideologies like Nazism and apartheid brought criticism from the South African Communist Party in 1984.[483] After the transition to universal suffrage, secondnameplaceholder's criticism of presidents Mbeki and Zuma brought objections from their supporters; in 2006, Zuma's personal advisor Elias Khumalo claimed that it as a double standard that secondnameplaceholder could "accept the apology from the apartheid government that committed unspeakable atrocities against millions of South Africans", yet "cannot find it in his heart to accept the apology" from Zuma.[484]secondnameplaceholder gained many international awards and honorary degrees, particularly in South Africa, the United Kingdom, and United States.[315] By 2003, he had approximately 100 honorary degrees;[485] he was, for example, the first person to be awarded an honorary doctorate by the Ruhr University of West Germany, and only the third person whom Columbia University in the U.S. agreed to award an honorary doctorate off-campus to.[486]  Many schools and scholarships were named after him.[315] For instance, in 2000 the Munsieville Library in Klerksdorp was renamed the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Library.[315] At Fort Hare University, the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder School of Theology was launched in 2002.[315]On 16 October 1984, the then Bishop secondnameplaceholder was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. The Nobel Committee cited his "role as a unifying leader figure in the campaign to resolve the problem of apartheid in South Africa".[487] This was seen as a gesture of support for him and The South African Council of Churches which he led at that time. In 1987 secondnameplaceholder was awarded the Pacem in Terris Award.[488] It was named after a 1963 encyclical letter by Pope John XXIII that calls upon all people of good will to secure peace among all nations.[489]In 2003, secondnameplaceholder received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement presented by Awards Council member Coretta Scott King.[490][491]  In 2008, Governor Rod Blagojevich of Illinois proclaimed 13 May 'firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Day'.[492]In 2015, Queen Elizabeth II was graciously pleased to approve firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder the honorary British award of The Order of the Companions of Honour. (CH).[493]  Queen Elizabeth II appointed secondnameplaceholder as a Bailiff Grand Cross of the Venerable Order of St. John in September 2017.[494]In 2010 firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder delivered the Bynum Tudor Lecture at the University of Oxford and became Visiting Fellow at Kellogg College, Oxford.[495] In 2013 he received the £1.1m ($1.6m) Templeton Prize for "his life-long work in advancing spiritual principles such as love and forgiveness".[496] In 2018 the fossil of a Devonian tetrapod was found in Grahamstown by Rob Gess of the Albany Museum; this tetrapod was named secondnameplaceholdersius umlambo in secondnameplaceholder's honour.[497]firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder accepted an honorary membership into the Golden Key International Honour Society, along with other notables such as Bill Clinton, Bill Ford, and Elie Wiesel. Golden Key International Honour Society is the world’s largest international collegiate honor society for graduate and undergraduate students, and has strong relationships with over 400 universities around the world.[498]
<h2>Writings</h2>
secondnameplaceholder is the author of seven collections of sermons and other writings:
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (/ˈɛli ˌviːˈzɛl/, born firstnameplaceholderzer secondnameplaceholder Hebrew: אֱלִיעֶזֶר וִיזֶל‎ ʾÉlīʿezer Vīzel;[2][3] September 30, 1928 – July 2, 2016) was a Romanian-born American writer, professor, political activist, Nobel laureate, and Holocaust survivor. He authored 57 books, written mostly in French and English, including Night, a work based on his experiences as a Jewish prisoner in the Auschwitz and Buchenwald concentration camps.[4]He was a professor of the humanities at Boston University, which created the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Center for Jewish Studies in his honor. He was involved with Jewish causes and human rights causes and helped establish the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, D. C. In his political activities, he also campaigned for victims of oppression in places like South Africa, Nicaragua, Kosovo, and Sudan. He publicly condemned the 1915 Armenian genocide and remained a strong defender of human rights during his lifetime. He was described as "the most important Jew in America" by the Los Angeles Times in 2003.[5]secondnameplaceholder was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1986. The Norwegian Nobel Committee called him a "messenger to mankind", stating that through his struggle to come to terms with "his own personal experience of total humiliation and of the utter contempt for humanity shown in Hitler's death camps", as well as his "practical work in the cause of peace", secondnameplaceholder has delivered a message "of peace, atonement, and human dignity" to humanity. The Nobel Committee also stressed that secondnameplaceholder's commitment originated in the sufferings of the Jewish people but that he expanded it to embrace all repressed peoples and races.[6] He was a founding board member of the New York Human Rights Foundation and remained active in it throughout his life.[7][8]
<h2>Early life</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was born in Sighet (now Sighetu Marmației), Maramureș, in the Carpathian Mountains of Romania.[9] His parents were Sarah Feig and Shlomo secondnameplaceholder. At home, secondnameplaceholder's family spoke Yiddish most of the time, but also German, Hungarian, and Romanian.[10][11] secondnameplaceholder's mother, Sarah, was the daughter of Dodye Feig, a celebrated Vizhnitz Hasid and farmer from the nearby village of Bocskó. Dodye was active and trusted within the community.secondnameplaceholder's father, Shlomo, instilled a strong sense of humanism in his son, encouraging him to learn Hebrew and to read literature, whereas his mother encouraged him to study the Torah. secondnameplaceholder has said his father represented reason, while his mother Sarah promoted faith.[12] secondnameplaceholder was instructed that his genealogy traced back to Rabbi Schlomo, son of Yitzhak, and was a descendant of Rabbi Yeshayahu ben Abraham Horovitz ha-Levi, an author.[13]secondnameplaceholder had three siblings—older sisters Beatrice and Hilda, and younger sister Tzipora. Beatrice and Hilda survived the war, and were reunited with secondnameplaceholder at a French orphanage. They eventually emigrated to North America, with Beatrice moving to Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Tzipora, Shlomo, and Sarah did not survive the Holocaust.
<h2>Imprisonment and orphaning during the Holocaust</h2>
In March 1944, Germany occupied Hungary, thus extending the Holocaust into Northern Transylvania as well.[a] secondnameplaceholder was 15, and he, with his family, along with the rest of the town's Jewish population, was placed in one of the two confinement ghettos set up in Máramarossziget (Sighet), the town where he had been born and raised. In May 1944, the Hungarian authorities, under German pressure, began to deport the Jewish community to the Auschwitz concentration camp, where up to 90 percent of the people were killed on arrival.[15]Immediately after they were sent to Auschwitz, his mother and his younger sister were murdered.[15] secondnameplaceholder and his father were selected to perform labor so long as they remained able-bodied, after which they were to be killed in the gas chambers. secondnameplaceholder and his father were later deported to the concentration camp at Buchenwald. Until that transfer, he admitted to Oprah Winfrey, his primary motivation for trying to survive Auschwitz was knowing that his father was still alive: "I knew that if I died, he would die."[16] After they were taken to Buchenwald, his father died before the camp was liberated.[15] In Night,[17] secondnameplaceholder recalled the shame he felt when he heard his father being beaten and was unable to help.[15][18]secondnameplaceholder was tattooed with inmate number "A-7713" on his left arm.[19][20] The camp was liberated by the U.S. Third Army on April 11, 1945, when they were just prepared to be evacuated from Buchenwald.[21]
<h2>Post-war career as a writer</h2>
After World War II ended and secondnameplaceholder was freed, he joined a transport of 1,000 child survivors of Buchenwald to Ecouis, France, where the Œuvre de secours aux enfants (OSE) had established a rehabilitation center. secondnameplaceholder joined a smaller group of 90 to 100 boys from Orthodox homes who wanted kosher facilities and a higher level of religious observance; they were cared for in a home in Ambloy under the directorship of Judith Hemmendinger. This home was later moved to Taverny and operated until 1947.[22][23]Afterwards, secondnameplaceholder traveled to Paris where he learned French and studied literature, philosophy and psychology at the Sorbonne.[15] He heard lectures by philosopher Martin Buber and existentialist Jean-Paul Sartre and he spent his evenings reading works by Fyodor Dostoyevsky, Franz Kafka, and Thomas Mann.[24]By the time he was 19, he had begun working as a journalist, writing in French, while also teaching Hebrew and working as a choirmaster.[25] He wrote for Israeli and French newspapers, including Tsien in Kamf (in Yiddish).[24]In 1946, after learning of the Irgun's bombing of the King David Hotel in Jerusalem, secondnameplaceholder made an unsuccessful attempt to join the underground Zionist movement. In 1948, he translated articles from Hebrew into Yiddish for Irgun periodicals, but never became a member of the organization.[26] In 1949, he traveled to Israel as a correspondent for the French newspaper L'arche. He then was hired as Paris correspondent for the Israeli newspaper Yedioth Ahronoth, subsequently becoming its roaming international correspondent.[27]For ten years after the war, secondnameplaceholder refused to write about or discuss his experiences during the Holocaust. He began to reconsider his decision after a meeting with the French author François Mauriac, the 1952 Nobel Laureate in Literature who eventually became secondnameplaceholder's close friend. Mauriac was a devout Christian who had fought in the French Resistance during the war. He compared secondnameplaceholder to "Lazarus rising from the dead", and saw from secondnameplaceholder's tormented eyes, "the death of God in the soul of a child".[29][30] Mauriac persuaded him to begin writing about his harrowing experiences.[24]secondnameplaceholder first wrote the 900-page memoir Un di velt hot geshvign (And the World Remained Silent) in Yiddish, which was published in abridged form in Buenos Aires.[31] secondnameplaceholder rewrote a shortened version of the manuscript in French, La Nuit, in 1955. It was translated into English as Night in 1960.[32] The book sold few copies after its initial publication, but still attracted interest from reviewers, leading to television interviews with secondnameplaceholder and meetings with writers such as Saul Bellow.As its profile rose, Night was eventually translated into 30 languages with ten million copies sold in the United States. At one point film director Orson Welles wanted to make it into a feature film, but secondnameplaceholder refused, feeling that his memoir would lose its meaning if it were told without the silences in between his words.[33] Oprah Winfrey made it a spotlight selection for her book club in 2006.[15]In 1955, secondnameplaceholder moved to New York as foreign correspondent for the Israel daily, Yediot Ahronot.[27] In 1969, he married Marion Erster Rose, who was from Austria, who also translated many of his books.[27] They had one son, Shlomo Elisha secondnameplaceholder, named after secondnameplaceholder's father.[27][34]In the U.S., he eventually wrote over 40 books, most of them non-fiction Holocaust literature, and novels. As an author, he was awarded a number of literary prizes and is considered among the most important in describing the Holocaust from a highly personal perspective.[27] As a result, some historians credited secondnameplaceholder with giving the term Holocaust its present meaning, although he did not feel that the word adequately described that historical event.[35] In 1975, he co-founded the magazine Moment with writer Leonard Fein.The 1979 book and play The Trial of God are said to have been based on his real-life Auschwitz experience of witnessing three Jews who, close to death, conduct a trial against God, under the accusation that He has been oppressive towards the Jewish people.[36]secondnameplaceholder also played a role in the initial success of The Painted Bird by Jerzy Kosinski by endorsing it before it became known the book was fiction and, in the sense that it was presented as all Kosinski's true experience, a hoax.[37][38]secondnameplaceholder published two volumes of memoirs. The first, All Rivers Run to the Sea, was published in 1994 and covered his life up to the year 1969. The second, titled And the Sea is Never Full and published in 1999, covered the years from 1969 to 1999.[39]
<h2>Political activism</h2>
secondnameplaceholder and his wife, Marion, started the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Foundation for Humanity in 1986. He served as chairman of the President's Commission on the Holocaust (later renamed the US Holocaust Memorial Council) from 1978 to 1986, spearheading the building of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, D.C.[41][42] Sigmund Strochlitz was his close friend and confidant during these years.[43]The Holocaust Memorial Museum gives the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Award to "internationally prominent individuals whose actions have advanced the Museum's vision of a world where people confront hatred, prevent genocide, and promote human dignity".[44] The Foundation had invested its endowment in money manager Bernard L. Madoff's investment Ponzi scheme, costing the Foundation $15 million and secondnameplaceholder and his wife much of their own personal savings.[45][46]In 1982, at the request of the Israeli Foreign Ministry, secondnameplaceholder agreed to resign from his position as chairman of a planned international conference on the Holocaust and the Armenian genocide. secondnameplaceholder then worked with the Foreign Ministry in its attempts to get the conference either cancelled or to remove all discussion of the Armenian genocide from it, and to those ends he provided the Foreign Ministry with internal documents on the conference's planning and lobbied fellow academics to not attend the conference.[47]secondnameplaceholder was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1986 for speaking out against violence, repression, and racism.[48] The Norwegian Nobel Committee described secondnameplaceholder as "one of the most important spiritual leaders and guides in an age when violence, repression, and racism continue to characterize the world".[28] secondnameplaceholder explained his feelings during his acceptance speech:He received many other prizes and honors for his work, including the Congressional Gold Medal in 1985, the Presidential Medal of Freedom, and The International Center in New York's Award of Excellence.[50] 
He was also elected to the American Academy of Arts and Letters in 1996.[51]secondnameplaceholder co-founded Moment magazine with Leonard Fein in 1975. They founded the magazine to provide a voice for American Jews.[52] He was also a member of the International Advisory Board of NGO Monitor.[53]secondnameplaceholder became a regular speaker on the subject of the Holocaust. As a political activist, he advocated for many causes, including Israel, the plight of Soviet and Ethiopian Jews, the victims of apartheid in South Africa, Argentina's Desaparecidos, Bosnian victims of genocide in the former Yugoslavia, Nicaragua's Miskito Indians, and the Kurds.[54][55]In April 1999, secondnameplaceholder delivered the speech "The Perils of Indifference" in Washington D.C., criticizing the people and countries who chose to be indifferent while the Holocaust was happening. He defined indifference as being neutral between two sides, which, in this case, amounts to overlooking the victims of the Holocaust. Throughout the speech, he expressed the view that a little bit of attention, either positive or negative, is better than no attention at all.[56]In 2003, he discovered and publicized the fact that at least 280,000 Romanian and Ukrainian Jews, along with other groups, were massacred in Romanian-run death camps.[57]In 2005, he gave a speech at the opening ceremony of the new building of Yad Vashem, the Israeli Holocaust History Museum:In early 2006, secondnameplaceholder accompanied Oprah Winfrey as she visited Auschwitz, a visit which was broadcast as part of The Oprah Winfrey Show.[59] On November 30, 2006, secondnameplaceholder received a knighthood in London in recognition of his work toward raising Holocaust education in the United Kingdom.[60]In September 2006, he appeared before the UN Security Council with actor George Clooney to call attention to the humanitarian crisis in Darfur. When secondnameplaceholder died, Clooney wrote, "We had a champion who carried our pain, our guilt, and our responsibility on his shoulders for generations."[40]In 2007, secondnameplaceholder was awarded the Dayton Literary Peace Prize's Lifetime Achievement Award.[61] That same year, the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Foundation for Humanity issued a letter condemning Armenian genocide denial, a letter that was signed by 53 Nobel laureates including secondnameplaceholder. secondnameplaceholder has repeatedly called Turkey's 90-year-old campaign to downplay its actions during the Armenian genocide a double killing.[62]In 2009, secondnameplaceholder criticized the Vatican for lifting the excommunication of controversial bishop Richard Williamson, a member of the Society of Saint Pius X.[63]  The excommunication was later reimposed.In June 2009, secondnameplaceholder accompanied US President Barack Obama and German Chancellor Angela Merkel as they toured the Buchenwald concentration camp.[64] secondnameplaceholder was an adviser at the Gatestone Institute.[65] In 2010, secondnameplaceholder accepted a five-year appointment as a Distinguished Presidential Fellow at Chapman University in Orange County, California. In that role, he made a one-week visit to Chapman annually to meet with students and offer his perspective on subjects ranging from Holocaust history to religion, languages, literature, law and music.[66]In July 2009, secondnameplaceholder announced his support to the minority Tamils in Sri Lanka. He said that, "Wherever minorities are being persecuted, we must raise our voices to protest ... The Tamil people are being disenfranchised and victimized by the Sri Lanka authorities. This injustice must stop. The Tamil people must be allowed to live in peace and flourish in their homeland."[67][68][69]In 2009, secondnameplaceholder returned to Hungary for his first visit since the Holocaust. During this visit, secondnameplaceholder participated in a conference at the Upper House Chamber of the Hungarian Parliament, met Prime Minister Gordon Bajnai and President László Sólyom, and made a speech to the approximately 10,000 participants of an anti-racist gathering held in Faith Hall.[70][71] However, in 2012, he protested against "the whitewashing" of Hungary's involvement in the Holocaust, and he gave up the Great Cross award he had received from the Hungarian government.[72][73]secondnameplaceholder was active in trying to prevent Iran from making nuclear weapons, stating that, "The words and actions of the leadership of Iran leave no doubt as to their intentions".[74] He also condemned Hamas for the "use of children as human shields" during the 2014 Israel-Gaza Conflict by running an ad in several large newspapers.[75] The Times refused to run the advertisement, saying, "The opinion being expressed is too strong, and too forcefully made, and will cause concern amongst a significant number of Times readers."[76][77]secondnameplaceholder often emphasized the Jewish connection to Jerusalem, and criticized the Obama administration for pressuring Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to halt East Jerusalem Israeli settlement construction.[78][79] He stated that "Jerusalem is above politics. It is mentioned more than six hundred times in Scripture—and not a single time in the Koran ... It belongs to the Jewish people and is much more than a city ..."[80][81]
<h2>Teaching</h2>
secondnameplaceholder held the position of Andrew Mellon Professor of the Humanities at Boston University from 1976,[82] teaching in both its religion and philosophy departments.[5] He became a close friend of the president and chancellor John Silber.[83] The university created the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Center for Jewish Studies in his honor.[82] From 1972 to 1976 secondnameplaceholder was a Distinguished Professor at the City University of New York and member of the American Federation of Teachers.[84][85]In 1982 he served as the first Henry Luce Visiting Scholar in Humanities and Social Thought at Yale University.[5] He also co-instructed Winter Term (January) courses at Eckerd College, St. Petersburg, Florida. From 1997 to 1999 he was Ingeborg Rennert Visiting Professor of Judaic Studies at Barnard College of Columbia University.[86]
<h2>Personal life</h2>
In 1969 he married Marion Erster Rose, who originally was from Austria and also translated many of his books.[27] They had one son, Shlomo Elisha secondnameplaceholder, named after secondnameplaceholder's father.[27][34] The family lived in Greenwich, Connecticut.[87]secondnameplaceholder was attacked in a San Francisco hotel by 22-year-old Holocaust denier Eric Hunt in February 2007, but was not injured. Hunt was arrested the following month and charged with multiple offenses.[88][89]In May 2011, secondnameplaceholder served as the Washington University in St. Louis commencement speaker.[90]In February 2012, a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints performed a posthumous baptism for Simon Wiesenthal's parents without proper authorization.[91] After his own name was submitted for proxy baptism, secondnameplaceholder spoke out against the unauthorized practice of posthumously baptizing Jews and asked presidential candidate and Latter-day Saint Mitt Romney to denounce it. Romney's campaign declined to comment, directing such questions to church officials.[92]
<h2>Death and aftermath</h2>
secondnameplaceholder died on the morning of July 2, 2016, at his home in Manhattan, aged 87.[45][93][94]Utah senator Orrin Hatch paid tribute to secondnameplaceholder in a speech on the Senate floor the following week, in which he said that "With firstnameplaceholder's passing, we have lost a beacon of humanity and hope. We have lost a hero of human rights and a luminary of Holocaust literature."[95]In 2018, antisemitic graffiti was found on the house where secondnameplaceholder was born.[96]
<h2>Awards and honors</h2>
secondnameplaceholder had received more than 90 honorary degrees from colleges worldwide.[115]Informational notesCitationsSpeeches and interviews
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder Uchiha secondnameplaceholder  Sánchez (Spanish pronunciation: [ˈoskaɾ ˈaɾjas]; born 13 September 1940 in Heredia, Costa Rica) is a Costa Rican activist and Nobel Peace Prize laureate. He was President of Costa Rica from 1986 to 1990 and from 2006 to 2010. He received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1987 for his efforts to end the Central American crisis.[1]
He was also a recipient of the Albert Schweitzer Prize for Humanitarianism and a trustee of Economists for Peace and Security.  In 2003, he was elected to the board of directors of the International Criminal Court's Trust Fund for Victims.[2]
<h2>Early life</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born within an upper-class family in the province of Heredia.[3] secondnameplaceholder concluded his secondary schooling at the Saint Francis College in the capital city of San José. He then went to the United States and enrolled in Boston University with the intention of studying medicine, but he soon returned to his home country and completed degrees in law and economics at the University of Costa Rica. In 1967, secondnameplaceholder traveled to the United Kingdom and enrolled in the London School of Economics. He received a doctoral degree in political science from the University of Essex in 1974. secondnameplaceholder has received over fifty honorary degrees, including doctorates from Harvard University, Princeton University, Dartmouth College, Oberlin College, Wake Forest University, Ithaca College and Washington University in St. Louis.
<h2>First presidency</h2>
secondnameplaceholder joined the National Liberation Party (PLN), Costa Rica's main social democratic party. In 1986 he ran successfully for president on that party's ticket. secondnameplaceholder's presidency saw the transformation of Costa Rica's economy from one based on the traditional cash crops (coffee and bananas) to one more focused on non-traditional agriculture (e.g., of exotic flowers and fruits) and tourism. Some within the PLN criticized his administration for abandoning the party's social democratic teachings and promoting a neoliberal economic model. He is now often regarded as a neoliberal although he is a member of a nominally social democratic party.[4]secondnameplaceholder received the 1987 Nobel Peace Prize with the help of John Biehl, his peer in England, and Rodrigo Madrigal Nieto for his work towards the signing of the Esquipulas II Accords. This was a plan intended to promote democracy and peace on the Central American isthmus during a time of great turmoil: leftist guerrillas were fighting against the governments in El Salvador and Guatemala, which were backed by the United States under the auspices of the Cold War; the Contras, supported by the United States, were fighting an insurgency against the Sandinista government in Nicaragua; Honduras, only recently wresting political power from its military, was caught in the middle as a base for U.S. military forces; and on Costa Rica's other border, Panama faced the oppression of Manuel Noriega's military dictatorship. With the support of secondnameplaceholder, the various armed conflicts ended within the decade (Guatemala's civil war finally ended in 1996).secondnameplaceholder then called for a higher level of integration in the Central America region and promoted the creation of the Central American Parliament (Parlamento Centroamericano). During his current administration, secondnameplaceholder has declared that Costa Rica will not enter the Central American Parliament.  secondnameplaceholder also modified the country's educational system. The most notable action in this respect was the reintroduction of standardized academic tests at the end of primary and secondary school.
<h2>Second presidency</h2>
The Costa Rican constitution had been amended in 1969 to include a clause forbidding former presidents to seek re-election. secondnameplaceholder challenged this at the Sala IV, the Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court of Justice of Costa Rica, which initially rejected his application in September 2000. In 2003, a group of secondnameplaceholder supporters presented an unconstitutionality challenge against the 1969 constitutional amendment forbidding re-election, and this time the ruling in April 2003 struck down the prohibition against non-consecutive re-election.[5] This decision was denounced as a "state blow" or "coup d'état" by ex-president Luis Alberto Monge.[6][7]secondnameplaceholder announced in 2004 that he intended to run again for president in the February 2006 general elections.  By then, he was the only living former president who was not either in jail, under indictment or facing an investigation.  Though for years private polling companies and several news media published polls predicting secondnameplaceholder would win by a wide margin, the election was initially deemed too close to call. A month later, on 7 March, after a manual recount, the official results showed secondnameplaceholder beat center-left contender Ottón Solís by 18,169 votes (1.2% of valid votes cast), and finished just a few thousand votes over the 40 percent threshold required to capture the presidency in a single round. He took the oath of office at noon on 8 May 2006 at the National Stadium. In his speech on 15 September 2008, he admitted that he was tired because of the criticism of his opponents.On 1 June 2007, he switched Costa Rica's diplomatic recognition from the Republic of China (Taiwan) to the People's Republic of China, making Costa Rica the 167th nation in the world to do so. Subsequently, under diplomatic and financial pressure from Beijing, he induced the Dalai Lama, a fellow Nobel Peace Prize laureate, to postpone indefinitely a proposed and much anticipated visit during Beijing's suppression of controversial riots in Tibet.[8]At the 5th Summit of the Americas in Trinidad and Tobago, on 18 April 2009, secondnameplaceholder gave a speech on the topic "We've been doing something wrong". Directed at fellow Latin American leaders, he decried Latin America's lack of development compared to other parts of the world, calling for pragmatism, and more resources directed at education rather than militaries.[9]In 2009, the Supreme Court of Honduras issued an arrest warrant for Honduran President Manuel Zelaya because of violations of the constitution and laws.[10][11]  Two days later, the National Congress of Honduras (in which Zelaya's own party held 62 out of 128 seats, more than any other party), also voted to dismiss Zelaya.[12][13][14]
Zelaya fled to Costa Rica.  The Honduran constitution mandated that the head of Congress, Roberto Micheletti, who was next in the presidential line of succession, becomes the provisional head of state since Vice President Elvin Ernesto Santos had resigned in December 2008 to run for president. Micheletti's term ended 27 January 2010.[15]secondnameplaceholder began serving as mediator between Zelaya and Micheletti in the 2009 Honduran constitutional crisis. Representatives of the two Hondurans met with secondnameplaceholder on various occasions but so far have failed to reach any kind of agreement.  As described above (with factual citations), secondnameplaceholder himself was initially prohibited by Costa Rica's constitutional court from another term, due to constitutional term limits, but this was reversed using legal means, with the consent of the Costa Rican Sala IV court, unlike in Honduras. New elections in Honduras are planned for 29 November 2009. Micheletti's government stated on 2 July 2009 that it is willing to hold this year's presidential election early. secondnameplaceholder presented a seven-point agreement, which calls for the return of Zelaya as president – a condition deemed unacceptable to the interim government. Zelaya's representatives accepted the secondnameplaceholder proposal "in principle" but Micheletti's representatives balked at the key point of Zelaya returning to power in Honduras.[16]
<h2>Health</h2>
In August 2007, secondnameplaceholder was affected by tendinitis, and in April 2008 he canceled some activities because of muscular pain in his lumbar region. Subsequently, due to increasing difficulty in speaking over the course of several weeks, secondnameplaceholder went to the Philadelphia Ears, Nose and Throat Associates medical center in the United States on 20 May 2008, where it was determined that he had a nonmalignant cyst on his vocal cords. As a result, it was announced on 21 May that doctors advised him not to speak for one month, saying that if this did not help, surgery would be considered.[17] On 11 August 2009 secondnameplaceholder was diagnosed with H1N1 Influenza, but he recovered.[18]
<h2>Controversy</h2>
Some Oscar secondnameplaceholder acts have generated controversy:Further controversies followed him even after his role as a president had come to an end. The route from Escazú to Caldera built by the Spanish company Autopistas del Sol has undergone heavy criticism over the years for its high tolls and dangerous roads (which had to undergo heavy maintenance to prevent further rock slides). Oscar secondnameplaceholder was also blamed for having invited a Canadian corporation to perform heavy mining which could potentially compromise the local biodiversity. Their permissions were revoked during the Chinchilla Miranda administration which gave the impression of secondnameplaceholder-Chinchilla enmity following his sudden criticism of then president Laura Chinchilla Miranda who was popularly regarded as a successor.
<h2>Judicial accusations</h2>
In 2017 Costa Rica's General Attorney office indicted secondnameplaceholder for the Crucitas case, a case in which former Environment Minister Roberto Dobles and secondnameplaceholder as president signed a 2008 decree ceding the Canadian company Infinito Gold control over a protected area near the Nicaraguan border known as Crucitas for gold mining and declaring it "national interest",[23] something that the Prosecution argued was illegal as protected areas cannot be granted for exploitation of any kind. Dobles was previously found guilty of the charges, but secondnameplaceholder was not indicted alongside him by the previous General Attorney Jorge Chavarría (often accused of being close to secondnameplaceholder).[24] The new General Attorney Emilia Navas reopened the case indicting secondnameplaceholder.[24]Also in 2019 psychiatrist and anti-Nuclear activist Alexandra Arce von Herold formally accused secondnameplaceholder of rape at the Public Ministry. Following her allegation three more women came to light accusing secondnameplaceholder of sexual harassment and misconduct.[23][25] secondnameplaceholder denied the charges.[23] In December 2020, all sexual harassment charges against secondnameplaceholder were dismissed.[26]
(!!)Article(!/!)
The 14th Dalai Lama[note 1] (spiritual name Jetsun Jamphel Ngawang Lobsang Yeshe firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, known as firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder; born Lhamo Dhondup),[note 2] known as Gyalwa Rinpoche to the Tibetan people, is the current Dalai Lama, the highest spiritual leader of Tibet, and a retired political leader of Tibet.[3] Born on 6 July 1935, or in the Tibetan calendar, in the Wood-Pig Year, 5th month, 5th day,[4] he is considered a living Bodhisattva; specifically, an emanation of Avalokiteśvara. He is also the leader of the Gelug school, the newest school of Tibetan Buddhism,[5] formally headed by the Ganden Tripa. The central government of Tibet, the Ganden Phodrang, invested the Dalai Lama with temporal duties until his exile in 1959.[6][7] On April 29, 1959, the Dalai Lama established the independent Tibetan government in exile, the Central Tibetan Administration, in the north Indian hill station of Mussoorie, which then moved in May 1960 to Dharamsala, where he resides. He retired as political head in 2011 to make way for a democratic government.[8][9][10]The 14th Dalai Lama was born to a farming family, in Taktser (Hongya in Chinese), in Amdo province (Qinghai in Chinese), northeastern Tibet.[1][2] He was selected as the tulku of the 13th Dalai Lama in 1937 and formally recognized as the 14th Dalai Lama in a public declaration near the town of Bumchen in 1939.[11] As with the recognition process for the 13th Dalai Lama, a Golden Urn selection process was not used.[12][13][14][15] His enthronement ceremony as the Dalai Lama was held in Lhasa on 22 February 1940 and he eventually assumed full temporal (political) duties on 17 November 1950, at the age of 15, after the People's Republic of China's occupation of Tibet.[11] The Tibetan government administered the historic Tibetan regions of Ü-Tsang, Kham and Amdo, and "In the course of Tibet's 2000-year history, the country came under a degree of foreign influence only for short periods of time in the thirteenth and eighteenth centuries."[16]During the 1959 Tibetan uprising, the Dalai Lama escaped to India, where he currently lives in exile while remaining the most important spiritual leader of Tibet. The Dalai Lama advocates for the welfare of Tibetans while continuing to call for the Middle Way Approach to negotiations with China for the autonomy of Tibet and the protection of Tibetan culture, including for the religious rights of Tibetans.The Dalai Lama also meets with other world leaders, religious leaders, philosophers and scientists, and travels worldwide giving Tibetan Buddhist teachings. His work includes focus on the environment, economics, women's rights, nonviolence, interfaith dialogue, physics, astronomy, Buddhism and science, cognitive neuroscience,[17][18][19] reproductive health and sexuality.Along with his teachings on Tibetan Mahayana and Vajrayana Buddhism, the Dalai Lama's Kalachakra teachings and initiations are international events.He is the chief Patron of the Maha Bodhi Society of India, conferred upon him at the 2008 Annual General Meeting of the Maha Bodhi Society of India.[20]The Dalai Lama is a recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize awarded in 1989, and the US Congressional Gold Medal in 2006. Time magazine named the Dalai Lama one of the "Children of Mahatma Gandhi" and Gandhi's spiritual heir to nonviolence.[21][22]
<h2>Early life and background</h2>
Lhamo Thondup[23] was born on 6 July 1935 to a farming and horse trading family in the small hamlet of Taktser,[note 3] or Chija Tagtser[28] (Chinese: 红崖村; pinyin: Hóngyá Cūn; lit. 'Redcliff Village'), at the edge of the traditional Tibetan region of Amdo in Qinghai Province.[24] He was one of seven siblings to survive childhood. The eldest was his sister Tsering Dolma, eighteen years his senior. His eldest brother, Thupten Jigme Norbu, had been recognised at the age of eight as the reincarnation of the high Lama Taktser Rinpoche. His sister, Jetsun Pema, spent most of her adult life on the Tibetan Children's Villages project. The Dalai Lama has said that his first language was "a broken Xining language which was (a dialect of) the Chinese language", a form of Central Plains Mandarin, and his family speak neither Amdo Tibetan nor Lhasa Tibetan.[29][30][31]Following reported signs and visions, three search teams were sent out to the north-east, the east, and the south-east to locate the new incarnation when the boy who was to become the 14th Dalai Lama was about two years old.[32] Sir Basil Gould, British delegate to Lhasa in 1936, related his account of the north-eastern team to Sir Charles Alfred Bell, former British resident in Lhasa and friend of the 13th Dalai Lama. Amongst other omens, the head of the embalmed body of the thirteenth Dalai Lama, at first facing south-east, had turned to face the north-east, indicating, it was interpreted, the direction in which his successor would be found. The Regent, Reting Rinpoche, shortly afterwards had a vision at the sacred lake of Lhamo La-tso which he interpreted as Amdo being the region to search. This vision was also interpreted to refer to a large monastery with a gilded roof and turquoise tiles, and a twisting path from it to a hill to the east, opposite which stood a small house with distinctive eaves. The team, led by Kewtsang Rinpoche, went first to meet the Panchen Lama, who had been stuck in Jyekundo, in northern Kham.[32] The Panchen Lama had been investigating births of unusual children in the area ever since the death of the 13th Dalai Lama.[33] He gave Kewtsang the names of three boys whom he had discovered and identified as candidates. Within a year the Panchen Lama had died. Two of his three candidates were crossed off the list but the third, a "fearless" child, the most promising, was from Taktser village, which, as in the vision, was on a hill, at the end of a trail leading to Taktser from the great Kumbum Monastery with its gilded, turquoise roof. There they found a house, as interpreted from the vision—the house where Lhamo Thondup lived.[32][33]The 14th Dalai Lama claims that at the time, the village of Taktser stood right on the "real border" between the region of Amdo and China.[34] When the team visited, posing as pilgrims, its leader, a Sera Lama, pretended to be the servant and sat separately in the kitchen. He held an old mala that had belonged to the 13th Dalai Lama, and the boy Lhamo Dhondup, aged two, approached and asked for it. The monk said "if you know who I am, you can have it." The child said "Sera Lama, Sera Lama" and spoke with him in a Lhasa accent, in a dialect the boy's mother could not understand. The next time the party returned to the house, they revealed their real purpose and asked permission to subject the boy to certain tests. One test consisted of showing him various pairs of objects, one of which had belonged to the 13th Dalai Lama and one which had not. In every case, he chose the Dalai Lama's own objects and rejected the others.[35]From 1936 the Hui 'Ma Clique' Muslim warlord Ma Bufang ruled Qinghai as its governor under the nominal authority of the Republic of China central government.[36] According to an interview with the 14th Dalai Lama, in the 1930s, Ma Bufang had seized this north-east corner of Amdo in the name of Chiang Kai-shek's weak government and incorporated it into the Chinese province of Qinghai.[37] Before going to Taktser, Kewtsang had gone to Ma Bufang to pay his respects.[33] When Ma Bufang heard a candidate had been found in Taktser, he had the family brought to him in Xining.[38] He first demanded proof that the boy was the Dalai Lama, but the Lhasa government, though informed by Kewtsang that this was the one, told Kewtsang to say he had to go to Lhasa for further tests with other candidates. They knew that if he was declared to be the Dalai Lama, the Chinese government would insist on sending a large army escort with him, which would then stay in Lhasa and refuse to budge.[39] Ma Bufang, together with Kumbum Monastery, then refused to allow him to depart unless he was declared to be the Dalai Lama, but withdrew this demand in return for 100,000 Chinese dollars ransom in silver to be shared amongst them, to let them go to Lhasa.[39][40] Kewtsang managed to raise this, but the family was only allowed to move from Xining to Kumbum when a further demand was made for another 330,000 dollars ransom: one hundred thousand each for government officials, the commander-in-chief, and the Kumbum Monastery; twenty thousand for the escort; and only ten thousand for Ma Bufang himself, he said.[41]Two years of diplomatic wrangling followed before it was accepted by Lhasa that the ransom had to be paid to avoid the Chinese getting involved and escorting him to Lhasa with a large army.[42] Meanwhile, the boy was kept at Kumbum where two of his brothers were already studying as monks and recognised incarnate lamas.[43] The payment of 300,000 silver dollars was then advanced by Muslim traders en route to Mecca in a large caravan via Lhasa. They paid Ma Bufang on behalf of the Tibetan government against promissory notes to be redeemed, with interest, in Lhasa.[43][44] The 20,000-dollar fee for an escort was dropped, since the Muslim merchants invited them to join their caravan for protection; Ma Bufang sent 20 of his soldiers with them and was paid from both sides since the Chinese government granted him another 50,000 dollars for the expenses of the journey. Furthermore, the Indian government helped the Tibetans raise the ransom funds by affording them import concessions.[44]Released from Kumbum, on 21 July 1939 the party travelled across Tibet on a journey to Lhasa in the large Muslim caravan with Lhamo Thondup, now 4 years old, riding with his brother Lobsang in a special palanquin carried by two mules, two years after being discovered. As soon as they were out of Ma Bufang's area, he was officially declared to be the 14th Dalai Lama by the Central Government of Tibet, and after ten weeks of travel he arrived in Lhasa on 8 October 1939.[45] The ordination (pabbajja) and giving of the monastic name of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder were handled by Reting Rinpoche. There was very limited Chinese involvement at this time.[46]Tibetan Buddhists normally refer to him as Yishin Norbu (Wish-Fulfilling Gem), Kyabgon (Saviour), or just Kundun (Presence). His devotees, as well as much of the Western world, often call him His Holiness the Dalai Lama, the style employed on the Dalai Lama's website. According to the Dalai Lama, he had a succession of tutors in Tibet including Reting Rinpoche, Tathag Rinpoche, Ling Rinpoche and lastly Trijang Rinpoche, who became junior tutor when he was nineteen.[47] At the age of 11 he met the Austrian mountaineer Heinrich Harrer, who became his videographer and tutor about the world outside Lhasa. The two remained friends until Harrer's death in 2006.[48]In 1959, at the age of 23, he took his final examination at Lhasa's Jokhang Temple during the annual Monlam or Prayer Festival.[note 4] He passed with honours and was awarded the Lharampa degree, the highest-level geshe degree, roughly equivalent to a doctorate in Buddhist philosophy.[50][51]
<h2>Life as the Dalai Lama</h2>
Historically the Dalai Lamas or their regents held political and religious leadership over Tibet from Lhasa with varying degrees of influence depending on the regions of Tibet and periods of history. This began with the 5th Dalai Lama's rule in 1642 and lasted until the 1950s (except for 1705–1750), during which period the Dalai Lamas headed the Tibetan government or Ganden Phodrang. Until 1912 however, when the 13th Dalai Lama declared the complete independence of Tibet, their rule was generally subject to patronage and protection of firstly Mongol kings (1642–1720) and then the Manchu-led Qing dynasty (1720–1912).[52]During the Dalai Lama's recognition process, the cultural Anthropologist Goldstein writes:Afterwards in 1939, at the age of four, the Dalai Lama was taken in a procession of lamas to Lhasa. The traditional ceremony enthroning the 14th Dalai Lama was attended by observing foreign dignitaries after a traditional Tibetan recognition processes. Sir Basil Gould, the British representative of the Government of India, has left a highly detailed account of the ceremonies surrounding the enthronement of the 14th Dalai Lama in Chapter 16 of his memoir, The Jewel in the Lotus.[54]  Despite historical records of eyewitness accounts, China's Kuomintang government later presented false claims to have ratified the Dalai Lama, and that a Kuomintang representative, General Wu Zhongxin, presided over the ceremony.The British representative Sir Basil Gould, who was also at the enthronement ceremony, disputes the Chinese claim to have presided over it. He criticised the Chinese account as follows:Tibetan scholar Nyima Gyaincain wrote that based on Tibetan tradition, there was no such thing as presiding over an event, and wrote that the word "主持 (preside or organize)" was used in many places in communication documents. The meaning of the word was different than what we understand today. He added that Wu Zhongxin spent a lot of time and energy on the event, his effect of presiding over or organizing the event was very obvious.[clarification needed][56]After his enthronement, the Dalai Lama's childhood was then spent between the Potala Palace and Norbulingka, his summer residence, both of which are now UNESCO World Heritage sites.Chiang Kai Shek ordered Ma Bufang to put his Muslim soldiers on alert for an invasion of Tibet in 1942.[57] Ma Bufang complied, and moved several thousand troops to the border with Tibet.[58] Chiang also threatened the Tibetans with aerial bombardment if they worked with the Japanese. Ma Bufang attacked the Tibetan Buddhist Tsang monastery in 1941.[59] He also constantly attacked the Labrang monastery.[60]In October 1950 the army of the People's Republic of China marched to the edge of the Dalai Lama's territory and sent a delegation after defeating a legion of the Tibetan army in warlord-controlled Kham. On 17 November 1950, at the age of 15, the 14th Dalai Lama assumed full temporal (political) power as ruler of Tibet.[11]The Panchen Lama and Dalai Lama had many conflicts throughout Tibetan history. Dalai Lama's formal rule was brief. He sent a delegation to Beijing, which ratified the Seventeen Point Agreement for the Peaceful Liberation of Tibet. He would later claim that the delegation did so without his authorization.[51][61][62] He worked with the Chinese government: in September 1954, together with the 10th Panchen Lama he went to the Chinese capital to meet Mao Zedong and attend the first session of the National People's Congress as a delegate, primarily discussing China's constitution.[63][64] On 27 September 1954, the Dalai Lama was selected as a Vice chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress,[65][66] a post he officially held until 1964.[67]In 1956, on a trip to India to celebrate the Buddha's Birthday, the Dalai Lama asked the Prime Minister of India, Jawaharlal Nehru, if he would allow him political asylum should he choose to stay. Nehru discouraged this as a provocation against peace, and reminded him of the Indian Government's non-interventionist stance agreed upon with its 1954 treaty with China.[51]Long called a "splitist" and "traitor" by China,[68] the Dalai Lama has attempted formal talks over Tibet's status in China.[69] In 2019, after the United States passed a law requiring the US to deny visas to Chinese officials in charge of implementing policies that restrict foreign access to Tibet, the US Ambassador to China "encouraged the Chinese government to engage in substantive dialogue with the Dalai Lama or his representatives, without preconditions, to seek a settlement that resolves differences".[70]The Chinese Foreign Ministry has warned the US and other countries to "shun" the Dalai Lama during visits and often uses trade negotiations and human rights talks as an incentive to do so.[71][72][73][74][75][76][77][78][79] China sporadically bans images of the Dalai Lama and arrests citizens for owning photos of him in Tibet.[80][81][82] Tibet Autonomous Region government job candidates must strongly denounce the Dalai Lama, as announced on the Tibet Autonomous Region government's online education platform, "Support the (Communist) Party’s leadership, resolutely implement the [Chinese Communist] Party’s line, line of approach, policies, and the guiding ideology of Tibet work in the new era; align ideologically, politically, and in action with the Party Central Committee; oppose any splittist tendencies; expose and criticize the Dalai Lama; safeguard the unity of the motherland and ethnic unity and take a firm stand on political issues, taking a clear and distinct stand".[83]The Dalai Lama is a target of Chinese state sponsored hacking. Security experts claim "targeting Tibetan activists is a strong indicator of official Chinese government involvement" since economic information is the primary goal of private Chinese hackers.[84] In 2009 the personal office of the Dalai Lama asked researchers at the Munk Center for International Studies at the University of Toronto to check its computers for malicious software. This led to uncovering GhostNet, a large-scale cyber spying operation which infiltrated at least 1,295 computers in 103 countries, including embassies, foreign ministries, other government offices, and organizations affiliated with the Dalai Lama in India, Brussels, London and New York, and believed to be focusing on the governments of South and Southeast Asia.[85][86][87] A second cyberspy network, Shadow Network, was discovered by the same researchers in 2010. Stolen documents included a years worth of the Dalai Lama's personal email, and classified government material relating to Indian, West Africa, the Russian Federation, the Middle East, and NATO. "Sophisticated" hackers were linked to universities in China, Beijing again denied involvement.[88][89] Chinese hackers posing as The New York Times, Amnesty International and other organization's reporters targeted the private office of the Dalai Lama, Tibetan Parliament members, and Tibetan nongovernmental organizations, among others, in 2019.[90]At the outset of the 1959 Tibetan uprising, fearing for his life, the Dalai Lama and his retinue fled Tibet with the help of the CIA's Special Activities Division,[92] crossing into India on 30 March 1959, reaching Tezpur in Assam on 18 April.[93] Some time later he set up the Government of Tibet in Exile in Dharamshala, India,[94] which is often referred to as "Little Lhasa". After the founding of the government in exile he re-established the approximately 80,000 Tibetan refugees who followed him into exile in agricultural settlements.[50] He created a Tibetan educational system in order to teach the Tibetan children the language, history, religion, and culture. The Tibetan Institute of Performing Arts was established[50] in 1959 and the Central Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies[50] became the primary university for Tibetans in India in 1967. He supported the refounding of 200 monasteries and nunneries in an attempt to preserve Tibetan Buddhist teachings and the Tibetan way of life.The Dalai Lama appealed to the United Nations on the rights of Tibetans. This appeal resulted in three resolutions adopted by the General Assembly in 1959, 1961, and 1965,[50] all before the People's Republic was allowed representation at the United Nations.[95] The resolutions called on China to respect the human rights of Tibetans.[50] In 1963, he promulgated a democratic constitution which is based upon the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, creating an elected parliament and an administration to champion his cause. In 1970, he opened the Library of Tibetan Works and Archives in Dharamshala which houses over 80,000 manuscripts and important knowledge resources related to Tibetan history, politics and culture. It is considered one of the most important institutions for Tibetology in the world.[96]In 2016, there were demands from Indian citizens and politicians of different political parties to confer the Dalai Lama the prestigious Bharat Ratna, the highest civilian honour of India, which has only been awarded to a non-Indian citizen twice in its history.[97]At the Congressional Human Rights Caucus in 1987 in Washington, D.C., the Dalai Lama gave a speech outlining his ideas for the future status of Tibet. The plan called for Tibet to become a democratic "zone of peace" without nuclear weapons, and with support for human rights.[citation needed] The plan would come to be known as the "Strasbourg proposal", because the Dalai Lama expanded on the plan at Strasbourg on 15 June 1988. There, he proposed the creation of a self-governing Tibet "in association with the People's Republic of China." This would have been pursued by negotiations with the PRC government, but the plan was rejected by the Tibetan Government-in-Exile in 1991.[citation needed] The Dalai Lama has indicated that he wishes to return to Tibet only if the People's Republic of China agrees not to make any precondition for his return.[98] In the 1970s, the Paramount leader Deng Xiaoping set China's sole return requirement to the Dalai Lama as that he "must [come back] as a Chinese citizen  ... that is, patriotism".[99]The Dalai Lama celebrated his seventieth birthday on 6 July 2005. About 10,000 Tibetan refugees, monks and foreign tourists gathered outside his home. Patriarch Alexius II of the Russian Orthodox Church alleged positive relations with Buddhists. However, later that year, the Russian state prevented the Dalai Lama from fulfilling an invitation to the traditionally Buddhist republic of Kalmykia.[100] The President of the Republic of China (Taiwan), Chen Shui-bian, attended an evening celebrating the Dalai Lama's birthday at the Chiang Kai-shek Memorial Hall in Taipei.[101] In October 2008 in Japan, the Dalai Lama addressed the 2008 Tibetan violence that had erupted and that the Chinese government accused him of fomenting. He responded that he had "lost faith" in efforts to negotiate with the Chinese government, and that it was "up to the Tibetan people" to decide what to do.[102]Thirty Taiwanese indigenous peoples protested against the Dalai Lama during his visit to Taiwan after Typhoon Morakot and denounced it as politically motivated.[103][104][105][106]The Dalai Lama is an advocate for a world free of nuclear weapons, and currently serves on the Advisory Council of the Nuclear Age Peace Foundation.The Dalai Lama has voiced his support for the Campaign for the Establishment of a United Nations Parliamentary Assembly, an organisation which campaigns for democratic reformation of the United Nations, and the creation of a more accountable international political system.[107]Despite becoming 80 years old in 2015, he maintains a busy international lecture and teaching schedule.[108] His public talks and teachings are usually webcast live in multiple languages, via an inviting organisation's website, or on the Dalai Lama's own website. Scores of his past teaching videos can be viewed there, as well as public talks, conferences, interviews, dialogues and panel discussions.[109]The Dalai Lama's best known teaching subject is the Kalachakra tantra which, as of 2014, he had conferred a total of 33 times,[110] most often in India's upper Himalayan regions but also in the Western world.[111] The Kalachakra (Wheel of Time) is one of the most complex teachings of Buddhism, sometimes taking two weeks to confer, and he often confers it on very large audiences, up to 200,000 students and disciples at a time.[111][112]The Dalai Lama is the author of numerous books on Buddhism,[113] many of them on general Buddhist subjects but also including books on particular topics like Dzogchen,[114] a Nyingma practice.In his essay "The Ethic of Compassion" (1999), the Dalai Lama expresses his belief that if we only reserve compassion for those that we love, we are ignoring the responsibility of sharing these characteristics of respect and empathy with those we do not have relationships with, which cannot allow us to "cultivate love." He elaborates upon this idea by writing that although it takes time to develop a higher level of compassion, eventually we will recognize that the quality of empathy will become a part of life and promote our quality as humans and inner strength.[115]He frequently accepts requests from students to visit various countries worldwide in order to give teachings to large Buddhist audiences, teachings that are usually based on classical Buddhist texts and commentaries,[116] and most often those written by the 17 pandits or great masters of the Nalanda tradition, such as Nagarjuna,[117][118] Kamalashila,[119][120] Shantideva,[121] Atisha,[122] Ayradeva[123] and so on.The Dalai Lama refers to himself as a follower of these Nalanda masters,[124] in fact he often asserts that 'Tibetan Buddhism' is based on the Buddhist tradition of Nalanda monastery in ancient India,[125] since the texts written by those 17 Nalanda pandits or masters, to whom he has composed a poem of invocation,[126] were brought to Tibet and translated into Tibetan when Buddhism was first established there and have remained central to the teachings of Tibetan Buddhism ever since.[127]As examples of other teachings, in London in 1984 he was invited to give teachings on the Twelve Links of Dependent Arising, and on Dzogchen, which he gave at Camden Town Hall; in 1988 he was in London once more to give a series of lectures on Tibetan Buddhism in general, called 'A Survey of the Paths of Tibetan Buddhism'.[128] Again in London in 1996 he taught the Four Noble Truths, the basis and foundation of Buddhism accepted by all Buddhists, at the combined invitation of 27 different Buddhist organisations of all schools and traditions belonging to the Network of Buddhist Organisations UK.[129]In India, the Dalai Lama gives religious teachings and talks in Dharamsala[122] and numerous other locations including the monasteries in the Tibetan refugee settlements,[116] in response to specific requests from Tibetan monastic institutions, Indian academic, religious and business associations, groups of students and individual/private/lay devotees.[130] In India, no fees are charged to attend these teachings since costs are covered by requesting sponsors.[116] When he travels abroad to give teachings there is usually a ticket fee calculated by the inviting organization to cover the costs involved[116] and any surplus is normally to be donated to recognised charities.[131]He has frequently visited and lectured at colleges and universities,[132][133][134] some of which have conferred honorary degrees upon him.[135][136]Dozens of videos of recorded webcasts of the Dalai Lama's public talks on general subjects for non-Buddhists like peace, happiness and compassion, modern ethics, the environment, economic and social issues, gender, the empowerment of women and so forth can be viewed in his office's archive.[137]The Dalai Lama met Pope Paul VI at the Vatican in 1973. He met Pope John Paul II in 1980, 1982, 1986, 1988, 1990, and 2003. In 1990, he met a delegation of Jewish teachers in Dharamshala for an extensive interfaith dialogue.[138] He has since visited Israel three times, and in 2006 met the Chief Rabbi of Israel. In 2006, he met Pope Benedict XVI privately. He has met the Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr. Robert Runcie, and other leaders of the Anglican Church in London, Gordon B. Hinckley, who at the time was the president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Mormons), as well as senior Eastern Orthodox Church, Muslim, Hindu, Jewish, and Sikh officials.
The Dalai Lama is also currently a member of the Board of World Religious Leaders as part of The Elijah Interfaith Institute[139] and participated in the Third Meeting of the Board of World Religious Leaders in Amritsar, India, on 26 November 2007 to discuss the topic of Love and Forgiveness.[140]In 2009, the Dalai Lama inaugurated an interfaith "World Religions-Dialogue and Symphony" conference at Gujarat's Mahuva religions, according to Morari Bapu.[141][142]In 2010, the Dalai Lama, joined by a panel of scholars, launched the Common Ground Project,[143] in Bloomington, Indiana (USA),[144] which was planned by himself and Prince Ghazi bin Muhammad of Jordan during several years of personal conversations. The project is based on the book Common Ground between Islam and Buddhism.[145]In 2019, the Dalai Lama fully-sponsored the first-ever 'Celebrating Diversity in the Muslim World' conference in New Delhi on behalf of the Muslims of Ladakh.[146]The Dalai Lama's lifelong interest in science[147][148] and technology[149] dates from his childhood in Lhasa, Tibet, when he was fascinated by mechanical objects like clocks, watches, telescopes, film projectors, clockwork soldiers[149] and motor cars,[150] and loved to repair, disassemble and reassemble them.[147] Once, observing the Moon through a telescope as a child, he realised it was a crater-pocked lump of rock and not a heavenly body emitting its own light as Tibetan cosmologists had taught him.[147] He has also said that had he not been brought up as a monk he would probably have been an engineer.[151] On his first trip to the west in 1973 he asked to visit Cambridge University's astrophysics department in the UK and he sought out renowned scientists such as Sir Karl Popper, David Bohm and Carl Friedrich von Weizsäcker,[150] who taught him the basics of science.The Dalai Lama sees important common ground between science and Buddhism in having the same approach to challenge dogma on the basis of empirical evidence that comes from observation and analysis of phenomena.[152]His growing wish to develop meaningful scientific dialogue to explore the Buddhism and science interface led to invitations for him to attend relevant conferences on his visits to the west, including the Alpbach Symposia on Consciousness in 1983 where he met and had discussions with the late Chilean neuroscientist Francisco J. Varela.[150] Also in 1983, the American social entrepreneur and innovator R. Adam Engle,[153] who had become aware of the Dalai Lama's deep interest in science, was already considering the idea of facilitating for him a serious dialogue with a selection of appropriate scientists.[154] In 1984 Engle formally offered to the Dalai Lama's office to organise a week-long, formal dialogue for him with a suitable team of scientists, provided that the Dalai Lama would wish to fully participate in such a dialogue. Within 48 hours the Dalai Lama confirmed to Engle that he was "truly interested in participating in something substantial about science" so Engle proceeded with launching the project.[155] Francisco Varela, having heard about Engle's proposal, then called him to tell him of his earlier discussions with the Dalai Lama and to offer his scientific collaboration to the project.[155] Engle accepted, and Varela assisted him to assemble his team of six specialist scientists for the first 'Mind and Life' dialogue on the cognitive sciences,[156] which was eventually held with the Dalai Lama at his residence in Dharamsala in 1987.[150][155] This five-day event was so successful that at the end the Dalai Lama told Engle he would very much like to repeat it again in the future.[157] Engle then started work on arranging a second dialogue, this time with neuroscientists in California, and the discussions from the first event were edited and published as Mind and Life's first book, "Gentle Bridges: Conversations with the Dalai Lama on the Sciences of Mind".[158]As Mind and Life Institute's remit expanded, Engle formalised the organisation as a non-profit foundation after the third dialogue, held in 1990, which initiated the undertaking of neurobiological research programmes in the United States under scientific conditions.[157] Over the following decades, as of 2014 at least 28 dialogues between the Dalai Lama and panels of various world-renowned scientists have followed, held in various countries and covering diverse themes, from the nature of consciousness to cosmology and from quantum mechanics to the neuroplasticity of the brain.[159] Sponsors and partners in these dialogues have included the Massachusetts Institute of Technology,[160] Johns Hopkins University,[161] the Mayo Clinic,[162] and Zurich University.[163]Apart from time spent teaching Buddhism and fulfilling responsibilities to his Tibetan followers, the Dalai Lama has probably spent, and continues to spend, more of his time and resources investigating the interface between Buddhism and science through the ongoing series of Mind and Life dialogues and its spin-offs than on any other single activity.[149] As the institute's Cofounder and the Honorary chairman he has personally presided over and participated in all its dialogues, which continue to expand worldwide.[164]These activities have given rise to dozens of DVD sets of the dialogues and books he has authored on them such as Ethics for the New Millennium and The Universe in a Single Atom, as well as scientific papers and university research programmes.[165] On the Tibetan and Buddhist side, science subjects have been added to the curriculum for Tibetan monastic educational institutions and scholarship.[166] On the Western side, university and research programmes initiated by these dialogues and funded with millions of dollars in grants from the Dalai Lama Trust include the Emory-Tibet Partnership,[167] Stanford School of Medicine's Centre for Compassion and Altruism Research and Education (CCARES)[168] and the Centre for Investigating Healthy Minds,[169] amongst others.In 2019, Emory University's Center for Contemplative Sciences and Compassion-Based Ethics, in partnership with The Dalai Lama Trust and the Vana Foundation of India, launched an international SEE Learning (Social, Emotional and Ethical Learning) program in New Delhi, India, a school curriculum for all classes from kindergarten to Std XII that builds on psychologist Daniel Goleman's work on emotional intelligence in the early 1990s. SEE learning focuses on developing critical thinking, ethical reasoning and compassion and stresses on commonalities rather than on the differences.[170][171][172][173]In particular, the Mind and Life Education Humanities & Social Sciences initiatives have been instrumental in developing the emerging field of Contemplative Science, by researching, for example, the effects of contemplative practice on the human brain, behaviour and biology.[165]In his 2005 book The Universe in a Single Atom and elsewhere, and to mark his commitment to scientific truth and its ultimate ascendancy over religious belief, unusually for a major religious leader the Dalai Lama advises his Buddhist followers: "If scientific analysis were conclusively to demonstrate certain claims in Buddhism to be false, then we must accept the findings of science and abandon those claims."[174] He has also cited examples of archaic Buddhist ideas he has abandoned himself on this basis.[147][175]These activities have even had an impact in the Chinese capital. In 2013 an 'academic dialogue' with a Chinese scientist, a Tibetan 'living Buddha' and a Professor of Religion took place in Beijing. Entitled "High-end dialogue: ancient Buddhism and modern science" it addressed the same considerations that interest the Dalai Lama, described as 'discussing about the similarities between Buddhism and modern science'.[176]The Dalai Lama uses various meditation techniques, including analytic meditation.[177] He has said that the aim of meditation is "to maintain a very full state of alertness and mindfulness, and then try to see the natural state of your consciousness."[178]
<h2>Social stances</h2>
The Dalai Lama has said that, from the perspective of the Buddhist precepts, abortion is an act of killing.[179] He has also clarified that in certain cases abortion could be considered ethically acceptable "if the unborn child will be retarded or if the birth will create serious problems for the parent", which could only be determined on a case-by-case basis.[180]The Dalai Lama says that he is active in spreading India's message of nonviolence and religious harmony throughout the world. "I am the messenger of India's ancient thoughts the world over." He has said that democracy has deep roots in India. He says he considers India the master and Tibet its disciple, as great scholars went from India to Tibet to teach Buddhism. He has noted that millions of people lost their lives in violence and the economies of many countries were ruined due to conflicts in the 20th century. "Let the 21st century be a century of tolerance and dialogue."[181]The Dalai Lama has also critiqued proselytization and certain types of conversion, believing the practices to be contrary to the fundamental ideas of religious harmony and spiritual practice.[182][183][184][185] He has stated that "It’s very important that our religious traditions live in harmony with one another and I don’t think proselytizing contributes to this. Just as fighting and killing in the name of religion are very sad, it’s not appropriate to use religion as a ground or a means for defeating others."[186] In particular, he has critiqued Christian approaches to conversion in Asia, stating that he has "come across situations where serving the people is a cover for proselytization."[187] The Dalai Lama has labeled such practices counter to the "message of Christ" and has emphasized that such individuals "practice conversion like a kind of war against peoples and cultures."[188] In a statement with Hindu religious leaders, he expressed that he opposes "conversions by any religious tradition using various methods of enticement."[189]In 1993, the Dalai Lama attended the World Conference on Human Rights and made a speech titled "Human Rights and Universal Responsibility".[190]In 2001, in response to a question from a Seattle schoolgirl, the Dalai Lama said that it is permissible to shoot someone in self-defense (if the person was "trying to kill you") and he emphasized that the shot should not be fatal.[191]In 2013, the Dalai Lama criticised Buddhist monks' attacks on Muslims in Myanmar and rejected violence by Buddhists, saying: "Buddha always teaches us about forgiveness, tolerance, compassion. If from one corner of your mind, some emotion makes you want to hit, or want to kill, then please remember Buddha's faith. ... All problems must be solved through dialogue, through talk. The use of violence is outdated, and never solves problems."[192] In May 2013, he said "Really, killing people in the name of religion is unthinkable, very sad."[193] In May 2015, the Dalai Lama called on Myanmar's Nobel Peace Prize winner Aung San Suu Kyi to do more to help the Rohingya Muslims in Myanmar, said that he had urged Suu Kyi to address the Rohingyas' plight in two previous private meetings and had been rebuffed.[194]In 2017, after Chinese dissident and Nobel Peace Prize laureate Liu Xiaobo died of organ failure while in Chinese government custody, the Dalai Lama said he was "deeply saddened" and that he believed that Liu's "unceasing efforts in the cause of freedom will bear fruit before long."[195]In October 2020, the Dalai Lama stated that he did not support Tibetan independence and hoped to visit China as a Nobel Prize winner. He said "I prefer the concept of a 'republic' in the People's Republic of China. In the concept of republic, ethnic minorities are like Tibetans, The Mongols, Manchus, and Xinjiang Uyghurs, we can live in harmony".[196]The Dalai Lama advocates compassion for animals and frequently urges people to try vegetarianism or at least reduce their consumption of meat. In Tibet, where historically meat was the most common food, most monks historically have been omnivores, including the Dalai Lamas. The Fourteenth Dalai Lama was raised in a meat-eating family but converted to vegetarianism after arriving in India, where vegetables are much more easily available and vegetarianism is widespread.[198] He spent many years as a vegetarian, but after contracting hepatitis in India and suffering from weakness, his doctors told him to return to eating meat which he now does twice a week.[199] This attracted public attention when, during a visit to the White House, he was offered a vegetarian menu but declined by replying, as he is known to do on occasion when dining in the company of non-vegetarians, "I'm a Tibetan monk, not a vegetarian".[200] His own home kitchen, however, is completely vegetarian.[201]The Dalai Lama has referred to himself as a Marxist and has articulated criticisms of capitalism.[202][203][204]He reports hearing of communism when he was very young, but only in the context of the destruction of Communist Mongolia. It was only when he went on his trip to Beijing that he learned about Marxist theory from his interpreter Baba Phuntsog Wangyal.[205] At that time, he reports, "I was so attracted to Marxism, I even expressed my wish to become a Communist Party member", citing his favorite concepts of self-sufficiency and equal distribution of wealth. He does not believe that China implemented "true Marxist policy",[206] and thinks the historical communist states such as the Soviet Union "were far more concerned with their narrow national interests than with the Workers' International".[207] Moreover, he believes one flaw of historically "Marxist regimes" is that they place too much emphasis on destroying the ruling class, and not enough on compassion.[207] He finds Marxism superior to capitalism, believing the latter is only concerned with "how to make profits", whereas the former has "moral ethics".[208] Stating in 1993:The Dalai Lama is outspoken in his concerns about environmental problems, frequently giving public talks on themes related to the environment. He has pointed out that many rivers in Asia originate in Tibet, and that the melting of Himalayan glaciers could affect the countries in which the rivers flow.[209] He acknowledged official Chinese laws against deforestation in Tibet, but lamented they can be ignored due to possible corruption.[210] He was quoted as saying "ecology should be part of our daily life";[211] personally, he takes showers instead of baths, and turns lights off when he leaves a room.[209] Around 2005, he started campaigning for wildlife conservation, including by issuing a religious ruling against wearing tiger and leopard skins as garments.[212][213] The Dalai Lama supports the anti-whaling position in the whaling controversy, but has criticized the activities of groups such as the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society (which carries out acts of what it calls aggressive nonviolence against property).[214] Before the 2009 United Nations Climate Change Conference, he urged national leaders to put aside domestic concerns and take collective action against climate change.[215]A monk since childhood, the Dalai Lama has said that sex offers fleeting satisfaction and leads to trouble later, while chastity offers a better life and "more independence, more freedom".[216] He has said that problems arising from conjugal life sometimes even lead to suicide or murder.[217] He has asserted that all religions have the same view about adultery.[218]In his discussions of the traditional Buddhist view on appropriate sexual behavior, he explains the concept of "right organ in the right object at the right time", which historically has been interpreted as indicating that oral, manual and anal sex (both homosexual and heterosexual) are not appropriate in Buddhism or for Buddhists. However, he also says that in modern times all common, consensual sexual practices that do not cause harm to others are ethically acceptable and that society should accept and respect people who are gay or transgender from a secular point of view.[219] In a 1994 interview with OUT Magazine, the Dalai Lama clarified his personal opinion on the matter by saying, "If someone comes to me and asks whether homosexuality is okay or not, I will ask 'What is your companion's opinion?' If you both agree, then I think I would say, 'If two males or two females voluntarily agree to have mutual satisfaction without further implication of harming others, then it is okay.'"[220] However, when interviewed by Canadian TV news anchor Evan Solomon on CBC News: Sunday about whether homosexuality is acceptable in Buddhism, the Dalai Lama responded that "it is sexual misconduct".[221]In his 1996 book Beyond Dogma, he described a traditional Buddhist definition of an appropriate sexual act as follows: "A sexual act is deemed proper when the couples use the organs intended for sexual intercourse and nothing else ... Homosexuality, whether it is between men or between women, is not improper in itself. What is improper is the use of organs already defined as inappropriate for sexual contact."[222] He elaborated in 1997, explaining that the basis of that teaching was unknown to him. He also conveyed his own "willingness to consider the possibility that some of the teachings may be specific to a particular cultural and historic context".[223]In 2006, the Dalai Lama has expressed concern at "reports of violence and discrimination against" LGBT people and urged "respect, tolerance and the full recognition of human rights for all".[224]In 2007, he said that the next Dalai Lama could possibly be a woman: "If a woman reveals herself as more useful the lama could very well be reincarnated in this form."[225]In 2009, on gender equality and sexism, the Dalai Lama proclaimed at the National Civil Rights Museum in Memphis, Tennessee: "I call myself a feminist. Isn't that what you call someone who fights for women's rights?" He also said that by nature, women are more compassionate "based on their biology and ability to nurture and birth children". He called on women to "lead and create a more compassionate world", citing the good works of nurses and mothers.[226]At a 2014 appearance at the Tata Institute of Social Sciences in Mumbai, the Dalai Lama said, "Since women have been shown to be more sensitive to others' suffering, their leadership may be more effective."[227]In 2015, he said in a BBC interview that if a female succeeded him, "that female must be attractive, otherwise it is not much use," and when asked if he was joking, replied, "No. True!" He followed with a joke about his current success being due to his own appearance.[228]In 2013, at the Culture of Compassion event in Derry, Northern Ireland, the Dalai Lama said that "Warm-heartedness is a key factor for healthy individuals, healthy families and healthy communities."[229]In a 2020 statement in Time magazine on the COVID-19 pandemic, the Dalai Lama said that the pandemic must be combated with compassion, empirical science, prayer, and the courage of healthcare workers. He emphasized "emotional disarmament" (seeing things with a clear and realistic perspective, without fear or rage) and wrote: "The outbreak of this terrible coronavirus has shown that what happens to one person can soon affect every other being. But it also reminds us that a compassionate or constructive act – whether working in hospitals or just observing social distancing – has the potential to help many."[230][231]In September 2018, speaking at a conference in Malmö, Sweden home to a large immigrant population, the Dalai Lama said "I think Europe belongs to the Europeans", but also that Europe was "morally responsible" for helping "a refugee really facing danger against their life". He stated that Europe has a responsibility to refugees to "receive them, help them, educate them", but that they should aim to return to their places of origin and that "they ultimately should rebuild their own country".[232][233]Speaking to German reporters in 2016, the Dalai Lama said there are "too many" refugees in Europe, adding that "Europe, for example Germany, cannot become an Arab country." He also said that "Germany is Germany".[234][235]
<h2>Retirement and succession plans</h2>
In May 2011, the Dalai Lama retired from the Central Tibetan Administration.[236]In September 2011, the Dalai Lama issued the following statement concerning his succession and reincarnation:In October 2011, the Dalai Lama repeated his statement in an interview with Canadian CTV News. He added that Chinese laws banning the selection of successors based on reincarnation will not impact his decisions. "Naturally my next life is entirely up to me. No one else. And also this is not a political matter," he said in the interview. The Dalai Lama also added that he has not decided on whether he would reincarnate or be the last Dalai Lama.[239]In an interview with the German newspaper Welt am Sonntag published on 7 September 2014 the Dalai Lama stated "the institution of the Dalai Lama has served its purpose", and that "We had a Dalai Lama for almost five centuries. The 14th Dalai Lama now is very popular. Let us then finish with a popular Dalai Lama."[240]secondnameplaceholder has also expressed fear that the Chinese government would manipulate any reincarnation selection in order to choose a successor that would go along with their political goals.[241] In response the Chinese government implied that it would select another Dalai Lama regardless of his decision.[242]
<h2>CIA Tibetan program</h2>
In October 1998, the Dalai Lama's administration acknowledged that it received $1.7 million a year in the 1960s from the U.S. government through a Central Intelligence Agency program.[243] When asked by CIA officer John Kenneth Knaus in 1995 to comment on the CIA Tibetan program, the Dalai Lama replied that though it helped the morale of those resisting the Chinese, "thousands of lives were lost in the resistance" and further, that "the U.S. Government had involved itself in his country's affairs not to help Tibet but only as a Cold War tactic to challenge the Chinese."[244]His administration's reception of CIA funding has become one of the grounds for some state-run Chinese newspapers to discredit him along with the Tibetan independence movement.In his autobiography Freedom in Exile, the Dalai Lama criticized the CIA again for supporting the Tibetan independence movement "not because they (the CIA) cared about Tibetan independence, but as part of their worldwide efforts to destabilize all communist governments".[245]In 1999, the Dalai Lama said that the CIA Tibetan program had been harmful for Tibet because it was primarily aimed at serving American interests, and "once the American policy toward China changed, they stopped their help."[246]
<h2>Criticism</h2>
The Chinese press has criticized the Dalai Lama for his close ties with India. His 2010 remarks at the International Buddhist Conference in Gujarat saying that he was "Tibetan in appearance, but an Indian in spirituality" and referral to himself as a "son of India" in particular led the People's Daily to opine, "Since the Dalai Lama deems himself an Indian rather than Chinese, then why is he entitled to represent the voice of the Tibetan people?"[247] Dhundup Gyalpo of the Tibet Sun replied that Tibetan religion could be traced back to Nalanda in India, and that Tibetans have no connection to Chinese "apart  ... from a handful of culinary dishes".[248] The People's Daily stressed the links between Chinese Buddhism and Tibetan Buddhism had accused the Dalai Lama of "betraying southern Tibet to India".[247] In 2008, the Dalai Lama said for the first time that the territory India claims and administers as part of Arunachal Pradesh is part of India, citing the disputed 1914 Simla Accord.[249]The Dorje Shugden Controversy reappeared in the Gelug school by the publication of the Yellow Book in 1976, containing stories about wrathful acts of Dorje Shugden against Gelugpas who also practiced Nyingma teachings. In response, the 14th Dalai Lama, a Gelugpa himself and advocate of an "inclusive" approach to the teachings of Tibetan Buddhism,[250][251] started to speak out against the practice of Dorje Shugden in 1978.[252]The controversy has attracted attention in the West because of demonstrations held in 2008 and 2014 by Dorje Shugden practitioners. A 2015 Reuters investigation determined "that the religious sect behind the protests has the backing of the Communist Party" and that the "group has emerged as an instrument in Beijing's long campaign to undermine support for the Dalai Lama".[253] After the Reuters investigation revealed that China backs it, the Shugden group halted operations and disbanded.[254]In April 2018, the Dalai Lama confirmed the official Chinese claims about Gedhun Choekyi Nyima by saying that he knew from "reliable sources" that the Panchen Lama he had recognized was alive and receiving normal education. He said he hoped that the Chinese-recognised Panchen Lama (Gyaincain Norbu) studied well under the guidance of a good teacher, adding that there were instances in Tibetan Buddhist tradition, of a reincarnated lama taking more than one manifestation.[255][256]
<h2>Public image</h2>
The Dalai Lama places highly in global surveys of the world's most admired men, ranking with Pope Francis as among the world's religious leaders cited as the most admired.[257][258]The Dalai Lama's appeal is variously ascribed to his charismatic personality, international fascination with Buddhism, his universalist values, and international sympathy for the Tibetans.[259] In the 1990s, many films were released by the American film industry about Tibet, including biopics of the Dalai Lama. This is attributed to both the Dalai Lama's 1989 Nobel Peace Prize as well as to the euphoria following the Fall of Communism. The most notable films, Kundun and Seven Years in Tibet (both released in 1997), portrayed "an idyllic pre-1950 Tibet, with a smiling, soft-spoken Dalai Lama at the helm – a Dalai Lama sworn to non-violence": portrayals the Chinese government decried as ahistorical.[260]The Dalai Lama has his own pages on Twitter,[261] Facebook,[262] and Instagram.[263]The Dalai Lama has tried to mobilize international support for Tibetan activities.[264] The Dalai Lama has been successful in gaining Western support for himself and the cause of greater Tibetan autonomy, including vocal support from numerous Hollywood celebrities, most notably the actors Richard Gere and Steven Seagal, as well as lawmakers from several major countries.[265] Photos of the Dalai Lama were banned after March 1959 Lhasa protests until after the end of the Cultural Revolution in 1976. In 1996 the Chinese Communist Party once again reinstated the total prohibition of any photo of the 14th Dalai Lama. According to the Tibet Information Network, "authorities in Tibet have begun banning photographs of the exiled Dalai Lama in monasteries and public places, according to reports from a monitoring group and a Tibetan newspaper. Plainclothes police went to hotels and restaurants in Lhasa, the Tibetan capital, on 22 and 23 April and ordered Tibetans to remove pictures of the Dalai Lama ..."[266] The ban continues in many locations throughout Tibet today.The 14th Dalai Lama has appeared in several non-fiction films including:He has been depicted as a character in various other movies and television programs including:The Dalai Lama was featured on 5 March 2017, episode of the HBO late-night talk show Last Week Tonight, in which host John Oliver conducted a comedic interview with the Dalai Lama, focusing on the topics of Tibetan sovereignty, Tibetan self-immolations, and his succession plans.[269][relevant?]A biographical graphic novel, Man of Peace, also envisaging the Dalai Lama's return to Tibet, was published by Tibet House US.[270][271] The Extraordinary Life of His Holiness the Fourteenth Dalai Lama: An Illuminated Journey, illustrations and text by artist Rima Fujita, narrated by the Dalai Lama, was published by Simon and Schuster in 2021.[272]The Dalai Lama has received numerous awards and honors worldwide over his spiritual and political career.[273][274][275]  After the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989, the Norwegian Nobel Committee awarded him the 1989 Nobel Peace Prize.[276] The Committee officially gave the prize to the Dalai Lama for "the struggle of the liberation of Tibet and the efforts for a peaceful resolution"[277] and "in part a tribute to the memory of Mahatma Gandhi"[278] although the president of the committee also said that the prize was intended to put pressure on China,[279] which was reportedly infuriated that the award was given to a separatist.[276]In 1959, he received the Ramon Magsaysay Award for Community Leadership;[280] in 1994, the Freedom Medal from the Roosevelt Institute;[281] and in 2005, the Christmas Humphreys Award from the Buddhist Society in the United Kingdom.In 2006, he became one of only six people ever to be granted Honorary Citizenship of Canada. In February 2007, the Dalai Lama was named Presidential Distinguished Professor at Emory University in Atlanta, Georgia, the first time he accepted a university appointment.[282]In 2007, the Dalai Lama received the Congressional Gold Medal, the highest civilian award bestowed by American lawmakers.[283] The Chinese government declared this would have "an extremely serious impact" on relations with the United States.[284]In 2012, the Dalai Lama was awarded the Templeton Prize.[285] He donated the prize money to the charity Save the Children.[286]
<h2>Early life</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born on 2 March 1931 in the village of Privolnoye, Stavropol Krai, then in the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic, one of the constituent republics of the Soviet Union.[4] At the time, Privolnoye was divided almost evenly between ethnic Russians and ethnic Ukrainians.[5] secondnameplaceholder's paternal family were ethnic Russians and had moved to the region from Voronezh several generations before; his maternal family were of ethnic Ukrainian heritage and had migrated from Chernigov.[6]
His parents named him Victor, but at the insistence of his mother—a devout Orthodox Christian—he had a secret baptism, where his grandfather christened him firstnameplaceholder.[7] His relationship with his father, Sergey Andreyevich secondnameplaceholder, was close; his mother, Maria Panteleyevna secondnameplaceholdera (née Gopkalo), was colder and punitive.[8] His parents were poor,[9] and lived as peasants.[10] They had married as teenagers in 1928,[11] and in keeping with local tradition had initially resided in Sergei's father's house, an adobe-walled hut, before a hut of their own could be built.[12]The Soviet Union was a one-party state governed by the Communist Party, and during secondnameplaceholder's childhood was under the leadership of Joseph Stalin. Stalin had initiated a project of mass rural collectivization which, in keeping with his Marxist–Leninist ideas, he believed would help convert the country into a socialist society.[13] secondnameplaceholder's maternal grandfather joined the Communist Party and helped form the village's first kolkhoz (collective farm) in 1929, becoming its chair.[14] This farm was 19 kilometres (12 mi) outside Privolnoye village and when he was three years old, secondnameplaceholder left his parental home and moved into the kolkhoz with his maternal grandparents.[15]The country was then experiencing the famine of 1932–33, in which two of secondnameplaceholder's paternal uncles and an aunt died.[16] This was followed by the Great Purge, in which individuals accused of being "enemies of the people", including those sympathetic to rival interpretations of Marxism like Trotskyism, were arrested and interned in labor camps, if not executed. Both of secondnameplaceholder's grandfathers were arrested (his maternal in 1934 and his paternal in 1937) and spent time in Gulag labor camps prior to being released.[17] After his December 1938 release, secondnameplaceholder's maternal grandfather discussed having been tortured by the secret police, an account that influenced the young boy.[18]Following on from the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939, in June 1941 the German Army invaded the Soviet Union. German forces occupied Privolnoye for four and a half months in 1942.[19] secondnameplaceholder's father had joined the Red Army and fought on the frontlines; he was wrongly declared dead during the conflict and fought in the Battle of Kursk before returning to his family, injured.[20] After Germany was defeated, secondnameplaceholder's parents had their second son, Aleksandr, in 1947; he and firstnameplaceholder would be their only children.[11]The village school had closed during much of the war but re-opened in autumn 1944.[21] secondnameplaceholder did not want to return but when he did he excelled academically.[22] He read voraciously, moving from the Western novels of Thomas Mayne Reid to the work of Vissarion Belinsky, Alexander Pushkin, Nikolai Gogol, and firstnameplaceholder Lermontov.[23] In 1946, he joined Komsomol, the Soviet political youth organization, becoming leader of his local group and then being elected to the Komsomol committee for the district.[24] From primary school he moved to the high school in Molotovskeye; he stayed there during the week while walking the 19 km (12 mi) home during weekends.[25] As well as being a member of the school's drama society,[26] he organized sporting and social activities and led the school's morning exercise class.[27] Over the course of five consecutive summers from 1946 onward he returned home to assist his father operate a combine harvester, during which they sometimes worked 20-hour days.[28] In 1948, they harvested over 8,000 centners of grain, a feat for which Sergey was awarded the Order of Lenin and his son the Order of the Red Banner of Labour.[29]In June 1950, secondnameplaceholder became a candidate member of the Communist Party.[30] He also applied to study at the law school of Moscow State University (MSU), then the most prestigious university in the country. They accepted without asking for an exam, likely because of his worker-peasant origins and his possession of the Order of the Red Banner of Labour.[31] His choice of law was unusual; it was not a well-regarded subject in Soviet society at that time.[32] Aged 19, he traveled by train to Moscow, the first time he had left his home region.[33]In the city, he resided with fellow MSU students at a dormitory in Sokolniki District.[34] He and other rural students felt at odds with their Muscovite counterparts but he soon came to fit in.[35] Fellow students recall him working especially hard, often late into the night.[36] He gained a reputation as a mediator during disputes,[37] and was also known for being outspoken in class, although would only reveal a number of his views privately; for instance he confided in some students his opposition to the Soviet jurisprudential norm that a confession proved guilt, noting that confessions could have been forced.[38] During his studies, an anti-semitic campaign spread through the Soviet Union, culminating in the Doctors' plot; secondnameplaceholder publicly defended a Jewish student who was accused of disloyalty to the country by one of their fellows.[39]At MSU, he became the Komsomol head of his entering class, and then Komsomol's deputy secretary for agitation and propaganda at the law school.[40] One of his first Komsomol assignments in Moscow was to monitor the election polling in Krasnopresnenskaya district to ensure the government's desire for near total turnout; secondnameplaceholder found that most of those who voted did so "out of fear".[41] In 1952, he was appointed a full member of the Communist Party.[42] As a party and Komsomol member he was tasked with monitoring fellow students for potential subversion; some of his fellow students said that he did so only minimally and that they trusted him to keep confidential information secret from the authorities.[43] secondnameplaceholder became close friends with Zdeněk Mlynář, a Czechoslovak student who later became a primary ideologist of the 1968 Prague Spring. Mlynář recalled that the duo remained committed Marxist–Leninists despite their growing concerns about the Stalinist system.[44] After Stalin died in March 1953, secondnameplaceholder and Mlynář joined the crowds amassing to see Stalin's body lying in state.[45]At MSU, secondnameplaceholder met Raisa Titarenko, a Ukrainian studying in the university's philosophy department.[46] She was engaged to another man but after that engagement fell apart, she began a relationship with secondnameplaceholder;[47] together they went to bookstores, museums, and art exhibits.[48] In early 1953, he took an internship at the procurator's office in Molotovskoye district, but was angered by the incompetence and arrogance of those working there.[49] That summer, he returned to Privolnoe to work with his father on the harvest; the money earned allowed him to pay for a wedding.[50] On 25 September 1953 he and Raisa registered their marriage at Sokolniki Registry Office;[50] and in October moved in together at the Lenin Hills dormitory.[51] Raisa discovered that she was pregnant and although the couple wanted to keep the child she fell ill and required a life-saving abortion.[52]In June 1955, secondnameplaceholder graduated with a distinction;[53] his final paper had been on the advantages of "socialist democracy" (the Soviet political system) over "bourgeois democracy" (liberal democracy).[54] He was subsequently assigned to the Soviet Procurator's office, which was then focusing on the rehabilitation of the innocent victims of Stalin's purges, but found that they had no work for him.[55] He was then offered a place on an MSU graduate course specializing in kolkhoz law, but declined.[56] He had wanted to remain in Moscow, where Raisa was enrolled on a PhD program, but instead gained employment in Stavropol; Raisa abandoned her studies to join him there.[57]
<h2>Rise in the Communist Party</h2>
In August 1955, secondnameplaceholder started work at the Stavropol regional procurator's office, but disliked the job and used his contacts to get a transfer to work for Komsomol,[58] becoming deputy director of Komsomol's agitation and propaganda department for that region.[59] In this position, he visited villages in the area and tried to improve the lives of their inhabitants; he established a discussion circle in Gorkaya Balka village to help its peasant residents gain social contacts.[60]secondnameplaceholder and his wife initially rented a small room in Stavropol,[61] taking daily evening walks around the city and on weekends hiking in the countryside.[62] In January 1957, Raisa gave birth to a daughter, Irina,[63] and in 1958 they moved into two rooms in a communal apartment.[64] In 1961, secondnameplaceholder pursued a second degree, on agricultural production; he took a correspondence course from the local Stavropol Agricultural Institute, receiving his diploma in 1967.[65] His wife had also pursued a second degree, attaining a PhD in sociology in 1967 from the Moscow Pedagogical Institute;[66] while in Stavropol she too joined the Communist Party.[67]Stalin was ultimately succeeded as Soviet leader by Nikita Khrushchev, who denounced Stalin and his cult of personality in a speech given in February 1956, after which he launched a de-Stalinization process throughout Soviet society.[68] Later biographer William Taubman suggested that secondnameplaceholder "embodied" the "reformist spirit" of the Khrushchev era.[69] secondnameplaceholder was among those who saw themselves as "genuine Marxists" or "genuine Leninists" in contrast to what they regarded as the perversions of Stalin.[70] He helped spread Khrushchev's anti-Stalinist message in Stavropol, but encountered many who continued to regard Stalin as a hero or who praised the Stalinist purges as just.[71]secondnameplaceholder rose steadily through the ranks of the local administration.[72] The authorities regarded him as politically reliable,[73] and he would flatter his superiors, for instance gaining favor with prominent local politician Fyodor Kulakov.[74] With an ability to outmanoeuvre rivals, some colleagues resented his success.[75] In September 1956, he was promoted First Secretary of the Stavropol city's Komsomol, placing him in charge of it;[76] in April 1958 he was made deputy head of the Komsomol for the entire region.[77] At this point he was given better accommodation: a two-room flat with its own private kitchen, toilet, and bathroom.[78] In Stavropol, he formed a discussion club for youths,[79] and helped mobilize local young people to take part in Khrushchev's agricultural and development campaigns.[80]In March 1961, secondnameplaceholder became First Secretary of the regional Komsomol,[81] in which position he went out of his way to appoint women as city and district leaders.[82] In 1961, secondnameplaceholder played host to the Italian delegation for the World Youth Festival in Moscow;[83] that October, he also attended the 22nd Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.[84] In January 1963, secondnameplaceholder was promoted to personnel chief for the regional party's agricultural committee,[85] and in September 1966 became First Secretary of the Stavropol City Party Organization ("Gorkom").[86] By 1968 he was increasingly frustrated with his job—in large part because Khrushchev's reforms were stalling or being reversed—and he contemplated leaving politics to work in academia.[87] However, in August 1968, he was named Second Secretary of the Stavropol Kraikom, making him the deputy of First Secretary Leonid Yefremov and the second most senior figure in the Stavrapol region.[88] In 1969, he was elected as a deputy to the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union and made a member of its Standing Commission for the Protection of the Environment.[89]Cleared for travel to Eastern Bloc countries, in 1966 he was part of a delegation visiting East Germany, and in 1969 and 1974 visited Bulgaria.[90] In August 1968 the Soviet Union led an invasion of Czechoslovakia to put an end to the Prague Spring, a period of political liberalization in the Marxist–Leninist country. Although secondnameplaceholder later stated that he had had private concerns about the invasion, he publicly supported it.[91] In September 1969 he was part of a Soviet delegation sent to Czechoslovakia, where he found the Czechoslovak people largely unwelcoming to them.[92] That year, the Soviet authorities ordered him to punish Fagien B. Sadykov, a Stavropol-based agronomist whose ideas were regarded as critical of Soviet agricultural policy; secondnameplaceholder ensured that Sadykov was fired from teaching but ignored calls for him to face tougher punishment.[93] secondnameplaceholder later related that he was "deeply affected" by the incident; "my conscience tormented me" for overseeing Sadykov's persecution.[94]In April 1970, Yefremov was promoted to a higher position in Moscow and secondnameplaceholder succeeded him as the First Secretary of the Stavropol kraikom. This granted secondnameplaceholder significant power over the Stavropol region.[95] He had been personally vetted for the position by senior Kremlin leaders and was informed of their decision by the Soviet leader, Leonid Brezhnev.[96] Aged 39, he was considerably younger than his predecessors in the position.[97] As head of the Stavropol region, he automatically became a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union in 1971.[98] According to biographer Zhores Medvedev, secondnameplaceholder "had now joined the Party's super-elite".[99] As regional leader, secondnameplaceholder initially attributed economic and other failures to "the inefficiency and incompetence of cadres, flaws in management structure or gaps in legislation", but eventually concluded that they were caused by an excessive centralization of decision making in Moscow.[100] He began reading translations of restricted texts by Western Marxist authors like Antonio Gramsci, Louis Aragon, Roger Garaudy, and Giuseppe Boffa, and came under their influence.[100]secondnameplaceholder's main task as regional leader was to raise agricultural production levels, something hampered by severe droughts in 1975 and 1976.[101]
He oversaw the expansion of irrigation systems through construction of the Great Stavropol Canal.[102] For overseeing a record grain harvest in Ipatovsky district, in March 1972 he was awarded by Order of the October Revolution by Brezhnev in a Moscow ceremony.[103] secondnameplaceholder always sought to maintain Brezhnev's trust;[104] as regional leader, he repeatedly praised Brezhnev in his speeches, for instance referring to him as "the outstanding statesman of our time".[105] secondnameplaceholder and his wife holidayed in Moscow, Leningrad, Uzbekistan, and resorts in the North Caucusus;[106] he holidayed with the head of the KGB, Yuri Andropov, who was favorable towards him and who became an important patron.[107] secondnameplaceholder also developed good relationships with senior figures like the Soviet Prime Minister, Alexei Kosygin,[108] and the longstanding senior party member firstnameplaceholder Suslov.[109]The government considered secondnameplaceholder sufficiently reliable that he was sent as part of Soviet delegations to Western Europe; he made five trips there between 1970 and 1977.[110] In September 1971 he was part of a delegation who traveled to Italy, where they met with representatives of the Italian Communist Party; secondnameplaceholder loved Italian culture but was struck by the poverty and inequality he saw in the country.[111] In 1972, he visited Belgium and the Netherlands, and in 1973 West Germany.[112] secondnameplaceholder and his wife visited France in 1976 and 1977, on the latter occasion touring the country with a guide from the French Communist Party.[113] He was surprised by how openly West Europeans offered their opinions and criticized their political leaders, something absent from the Soviet Union, where most people did not feel safe speaking so openly.[114] He later related that for him and his wife, these visits "shook our a priori belief in the superiority of socialist over bourgeois democracy".[115]secondnameplaceholder had remained close to his parents; after his father became terminally ill in 1974, secondnameplaceholder traveled to be with him in Privolnoe shortly before his death.[116] His daughter, Irina, married fellow student Anatoly Virgansky in April 1978.[117] In 1977, the Supreme Soviet appointed secondnameplaceholder to chair the Standing Commission on Youth Affairs due to his experience with mobilizing young people in Komsomol.[118]In November 1978, secondnameplaceholder was appointed a Secretary of the Central Committee.[119] His appointment had been approved unanimously by the Central Committee's members.[120] To fill this position, secondnameplaceholder and his wife moved to Moscow, where they were initially given an old dacha outside the city. They then moved to another, at Sosnovka, before finally being allocated a newly built brick house.[121] He was also given an apartment inside the city, but gave that to his daughter and son-in-law; Irina had begun work at Moscow's Second Medical Institute.[122] As part of the Moscow political elite, secondnameplaceholder and his wife now had access to better medical care and to specialized shops; they were also given cooks, servants, bodyguards, and secretaries, although many of these were spies for the KGB.[123] In his new position, secondnameplaceholder often worked twelve to sixteen hour days.[123] He and his wife socialized little, but liked to visit Moscow's theaters and museums.[124]In 1978, secondnameplaceholder was appointed to the Central Committee's Secretariat for Agriculture, replacing his old friend Kulakov, who had died of a heart attack.[125] secondnameplaceholder concentrated his attentions on agriculture: the harvests of 1979, 1980, and 1981 were all poor, due largely to weather conditions,[126] and the country had to import increasing quantities of grain.[127] He had growing concerns about the country's agricultural management system, coming to regard it as overly centralized and requiring more bottom-up decision making;[128] he raised these points at his first speech at a Central Committee Plenum, given in July 1978.[129] He began to have concerns about other policies too. In December 1979, the Soviets sent the Red Army into neighbouring Afghanistan to support its Soviet-aligned government against Islamist insurgents; secondnameplaceholder privately thought it a mistake.[130] At times he openly supported the government position; in October 1980 he for instance endorsed Soviet calls for Poland's Marxist–Leninist government to crack down on growing internal dissent in that country.[130] That same month, he was promoted from a candidate member to a full member of the Politburo, the highest decision-making authority in the Communist Party.[131] At the time, he was the Politburo's youngest member.[131]After Brezhnev's death in November 1982, Andropov succeeded him as General Secretary of the Communist Party, the de facto head of government in the Soviet Union. secondnameplaceholder was enthusiastic about the appointment.[132] However, although secondnameplaceholder hoped that Andropov would introduce liberalizing reforms, the latter carried out only personnel shifts rather than structural change.[133] secondnameplaceholder became Andropov's closest ally in the Politburo;[134] with Andropov's encouragement, secondnameplaceholder sometimes chaired Politburo meetings.[135] Andropov encouraged secondnameplaceholder to expand into policy areas other than agriculture, preparing him for future higher office.[136] In April 1983, secondnameplaceholder delivered the annual speech marking the birthday of the Soviet founder Vladimir Lenin;[137] this required him re-reading many of Lenin's later writings, in which the latter had called for reform in the context of the New Economic Policy of the 1920s, and encouraged secondnameplaceholder's own conviction that reform was needed.[138] In May 1983, secondnameplaceholder was sent to Canada, where he met Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau and spoke to the Canadian Parliament.[139] There, he met and befriended the Soviet ambassador, Aleksandr Yakovlev, who later became a key political ally.[140]In February 1984, Andropov died; on his deathbed he indicated his desire that secondnameplaceholder succeed him.[141] Many in the Central Committee nevertheless thought the 53-year old secondnameplaceholder was too young and inexperienced.[142] Instead, Konstantin Chernenko—a longstanding Brezhnev ally—was appointed General Secretary, but he too was in very poor health.[143] Chernenko was often too sick to chair Politburo meetings, with secondnameplaceholder stepping in last minute.[144] secondnameplaceholder continued to cultivate allies both in the Kremlin and beyond,[145] and also gave the main speech at a conference on Soviet ideology, where he angered party hardliners by implying that the country required reform.[146]In April 1984, he was appointed chair of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the Soviet legislature, a largely honorific position.[147] In June he traveled to Italy as a Soviet representative for the funeral of Italian Communist Party leader Enrico Berlinguer,[148] and in September to Sofia, Bulgaria to attend celebrations of the fortieth anniversary of its liberation by the Red Army.[149] In December, he visited Britain at the request of its Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher; she was aware that he was a potential reformer and wanted to meet him.[150] At the end of the visit, Thatcher said: "I like Mr secondnameplaceholder. We can do business together".[151] He felt that the visit helped to erode Andrei Gromyko's dominance of Soviet foreign policy while at the same time sending a signal to the United States government that he wanted to improve Soviet-U.S. relations.[152]
<h2>General Secretary of the CPSU</h2>
On 10 March 1985, Chernenko died.[153] Gromyko proposed secondnameplaceholder as the next General Secretary; as a longstanding party member, Gromyko's recommendation carried great weight among the Central Committee.[154] secondnameplaceholder expected much opposition to his nomination as General Secretary, but ultimately the rest of the Politburo supported him.[155] Shortly after Chernenko's death, the Politburo unanimously elected secondnameplaceholder as his successor; they wanted him over another elderly leader.[156] He thus became the eighth leader of the Soviet Union.[10] Few in the government imagined that he would be as radical a reformer as he proved.[157] Although not a well-known figure to the Soviet public, there was widespread relief that the new leader was not elderly and ailing.[158] secondnameplaceholder's first public appearance as leader was at Chernenko's Red Square funeral, held on 14 March.[159] Two months after being elected, he left Moscow for the first time, traveling to Leningrad, where he spoke to assembled crowds.[160] In June he traveled to Ukraine, in July to Belarus, and in September to Tyumen Oblast, urging party members in these areas to take more responsibility for fixing local problems.[161]secondnameplaceholder's leadership style differed from that of his predecessors. He would stop to talk to civilians on the street, forbade the display of his portrait at the 1985 Red Square holiday celebrations, and encouraged frank and open discussions at Politburo meetings.[162] To the West, secondnameplaceholder was seen as a more moderate and less threatening Soviet leader; some Western commentators however believed this an act to lull Western governments into a false sense of security.[163] His wife was his closest adviser, and took on the unofficial role of a "first lady" by appearing with him on foreign trips; her public visibility was a breach of standard practice and generated resentment.[164] His other close aides were Georgy Shakhnazarov and Anatoly Chernyaev.[165]secondnameplaceholder was aware that the Politburo could remove him from office, and that he could not pursue more radical reform without a majority of supporters in the Politburo.[166] He sought to remove several older members from the Politburo, encouraging Grigory Romanov, Nikolai Tikhonov, and Viktor Grishin into retirement.[167] He promoted Gromyko to head of state, a largely ceremonial role with little influence, and moved his own ally, Eduard Shevardnadze, to Gromyko's former post in charge of foreign policy.[168] Other allies whom he saw promoted were Yakovlev, Anatoly Lukyanov, and Vadim Medvedev.[169] Another of those promoted by secondnameplaceholder was Boris Yeltsin, who was made a Secretary of the Central Committee in July 1985.[170] Most of these appointees were from a new generation of well-educated officials who had been frustrated during the Brezhnev era.[171] In his first year, 14 of the 23 heads of department in the secretariat were replaced.[172] Doing so, secondnameplaceholder secured dominance in the Politburo within a year, faster than either Stalin, Khrushchev, or Brezhnev had achieved.[173]secondnameplaceholder recurrently employed the term perestroika, first used publicly in March 1984.[174] He saw perestroika as encompassing a complex series of reforms to restructure society and the economy.[175] He was concerned by the country's low productivity, poor work ethic, and inferior quality goods;[176] like several economists, he feared this would lead to the country becoming a second-rate power.[177] The first stage of secondnameplaceholder's perestroika was uskoreniye ("acceleration"), a term he used regularly in the first two years of his leadership.[178] The Soviet Union was behind the United States in many areas of production,[179] but secondnameplaceholder claimed that it would accelerate industrial output to match that of the U.S. by 2000.[180] The Five Year Plan of 1985–90 was targeted to expand machine building by 50 to 100%.[181] To boost agricultural productivity, he merged five ministries and a state committee into a single entity, Agroprom, although by late 1986 acknowledged this merger as a failure.[182]The purpose of reform was to prop up the centrally planned economy—not to transition to market socialism. Speaking in late summer 1985 to the secretaries for economic affairs of the central committees of the East European communist parties, secondnameplaceholder said: "Many of you see the solution to your problems in resorting to market mechanisms in place of direct planning. Some of you look at the market as a lifesaver for your economies. But, comrades, you should not think about lifesavers but about the ship, and the ship is socialism."[183]
secondnameplaceholder's perestroika also entailed attempts to move away from technocratic management of the economy by increasingly involving the labor force in industrial production.[184] He was of the view that once freed from the strong control of central planners, state-owned enterprises would act as market agents.[185] secondnameplaceholder and other Soviet leaders did not anticipate opposition to the perestroika reforms; according to their interpretation of Marxism, they believed that in a socialist society like the Soviet Union there would not be "antagonistic contradictions".[186] However, there would come to be a public perception in the country that many bureaucrats were paying lip service to the reforms while trying to undermine them.[187] He also initiated the concept of gospriyomka (state acceptance of production) during his time as leader,[188] which represented quality control.[189] In April 1986, he introduced an agrarian reform which linked salaries to output and allowed collective farms to sell 30% of their produce directly to shops or co-operatives rather than giving it all to the state for distribution.[190] In a September 1986 speech, he embraced the idea of reintroducing market economics to the country alongside limited private enterprise, citing Lenin's New Economic Policy as a precedent; he nevertheless stressed that he did not regard this as a return to capitalism.[190]In the Soviet Union, alcohol consumption had risen steadily between 1950 and 1985.[191] By the 1980s, drunkenness was a major social problem and Andropov had planned a major campaign to limit alcohol consumption. Encouraged by his wife, secondnameplaceholder—who believed the campaign would improve health and work efficiency—oversaw its implementation.[192] Alcohol production was reduced by around 40 percent, the legal drinking age rose from 18 to 21, alcohol prices were increased, stores were banned from selling it before 2pm, and tougher penalties were introduced for workplace or public drunkenness and home production of alcohol.[193] The All-Union Voluntary Society for the Struggle for Temperance was formed to promote sobriety; it had over 14 million members within three years.[194] As a result, crime rates fell and life expectancy grew slightly between 1986 and 1987.[195] However, moonshine production rose considerably,[196] and the reform had significant costs to the Soviet economy, resulting in losses of up to US$100 billion between 1985 and 1990.[197] secondnameplaceholder later considered the campaign to have been an error,[198] and it was terminated in October 1988.[199] After it ended, it took several years for production to return to previous levels, after which alcohol consumption soared in Russia between 1990 and 1993.[200]In the second year of his leadership, secondnameplaceholder began speaking of glasnost, or "openness".[201] According to Doder and Branston, this meant "greater openness and candour in government affairs and for an interplay of different and sometimes conflicting views in political debates, in the press, and in Soviet culture."[202] Encouraging reformers into prominent media positions, he brought in Sergei Zalygin as head of Novy Mir magazine and Yegor Yakovlev as editor-in-chief of Moscow News.[203] He made the historian Yuri Afanasiev dean of the State Historical Archive Faculty, from where Afansiev could press for the opening of secret archives and the reassessment of Soviet history.[171] Prominent dissidents like Andrei Sakharov were freed from internal exile or prison.[204] secondnameplaceholder saw glasnost as a necessary measure to ensure perestroika by alerting the Soviet populace to the nature of the country's problems in the hope that they would support his efforts to fix them.[205] Particularly popular among the Soviet intelligentsia, who became key secondnameplaceholder supporters,[206] glasnost boosted his domestic popularity but alarmed many Communist Party hardliners.[207] For many Soviet citizens, this newfound level of freedom of speech and press—and its accompanying revelations about the country's past—was uncomfortable.[208]Some in the party thought secondnameplaceholder was not going far enough in his reforms; a prominent liberal critic was Yeltsin. He had risen rapidly since 1985, attaining the role of Moscow city boss.[209] Like many members of the government, secondnameplaceholder was skeptical of Yeltsin, believing that he engaged in too much self-promotion.[210] Yeltsin was also critical of secondnameplaceholder, regarding him as patronizing.[209]
In early 1986, Yeltsin began sniping at secondnameplaceholder in Politburo meetings.[210] At the Twenty-Seventh Party Congress in February, Yeltsin called for more far-reaching reforms than secondnameplaceholder was initiating and criticized the party leadership, although did not cite secondnameplaceholder by name, claiming that a new cult of personality was forming. secondnameplaceholder then opened the floor to responses, after which attendees publicly criticized Yeltsin for several hours.[211] After this, secondnameplaceholder also criticized Yeltsin, claiming that he only cared for himself and was "politically illiterate".[212] Yeltsin then resigned as both Moscow boss and as a member of the Politburo.[212] From this point, tensions between the two men developed into a mutual hatred.[213]In April 1986 the Chernobyl disaster occurred.[214] In the immediate aftermath, officials fed secondnameplaceholder incorrect information to downplay the incident. As the scale of the disaster became apparent, 336,000 people were evacuated from the area around Chernobyl.[215] Taubman noted that the disaster marked "a turning point for secondnameplaceholder and the Soviet regime".[216] Several days after it occurred, he gave a televised report to the nation.[217] He cited the disaster as evidence for what he regarded as widespread problems in Soviet society, such as shoddy workmanship and workplace inertia.[218] secondnameplaceholder later described the incident as one which made him appreciate the scale of incompetence and cover-ups in the Soviet Union.[216] From April to the end of the year, secondnameplaceholder became increasingly open in his criticism of the Soviet system, including food production, state bureaucracy, the military draft, and the large size of the prison population.[219]In a May 1985 speech given to the Soviet Foreign Ministry—the first time a Soviet leader had directly addressed his country's diplomats—secondnameplaceholder spoke of a "radical restructuring" of foreign policy.[220] A major issue facing his leadership was Soviet involvement in the Afghan Civil War, which had then been going on for over five years.[221] Over the course of the war, the Soviet Army took heavy casualties and there was much opposition to Soviet involvement among both the public and military.[221] On becoming leader, secondnameplaceholder saw withdrawal from the war as a key priority.[222] In October 1985, he met with Afghan Marxist leader Babrak Karmal, urging him to acknowledge the lack of widespread public support for his government and pursue a power sharing agreement with the opposition.[222] That month, the Politburo approved secondnameplaceholder's decision to withdraw combat troops from Afghanistan, although the last troops did not leave until February 1989.[223]secondnameplaceholder had inherited a renewed period of high tension in the Cold War.[224] He believed strongly in the need to sharply improve relations with the United States; he was appalled at the prospect of nuclear war, was aware that the Soviet Union was unlikely to win the arms race, and thought that the continued focus on high military spending was detrimental to his desire for domestic reform.[224] Although privately also appalled at the prospect of nuclear war, U.S. President Ronald Reagan publicly appeared to not want a de-escalation of tensions, having scrapped détente and arms controls, initiating a military build-up, and calling the Soviet Union the "evil empire".[225]Both secondnameplaceholder and Reagan wanted a summit to discuss the Cold War, but each faced some opposition to such a move within their respective governments.[226] They agreed to hold a summit in Geneva, Switzerland in November 1985.[227] In the buildup to this, secondnameplaceholder sought to improve relations with the U.S.'s NATO allies, visiting France in October 1985 to meet with President François Mitterrand.[228] At the Geneva summit, discussions between secondnameplaceholder and Reagan were sometimes heated, and secondnameplaceholder was initially frustrated that his U.S. counterpart "does not seem to hear what I am trying to say".[229] As well as discussing the Cold War proxy conflicts in Afghanistan and Nicaragua and human rights issues, the pair discussed the U.S.'s Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), to which secondnameplaceholder was strongly opposed.[230] The duo's wives also met and spent time together at the summit.[231] The summit ended with a joint commitment to avoiding nuclear war and to meet for two further summits: in Washington D.C. in 1986 and in Moscow in 1987.[230] Following the conference, secondnameplaceholder traveled to Prague to inform other Warsaw Pact leaders of developments.[232]In January 1986, secondnameplaceholder publicly proposed a three-stage programme for abolishing the world's nuclear weapons by the end of the 20th century.[234] An agreement was then reached to meet with Reagan in Reykjavík, Iceland in October 1986. secondnameplaceholder wanted to secure guarantees that SDI would not be implemented, and in return was willing to offer concessions, including a 50% reduction in Soviet long range nuclear missiles.[235] Both leaders agreed with the shared goal of abolishing nuclear weapons, but Reagan refused to terminate the SDI program and no deal was reached.[236] After the summit, many of Reagan's allies criticized him for going along with the idea of abolishing nuclear weapons.[237] secondnameplaceholder meanwhile told the Politburo that Reagan was "extraordinarily primitive, troglodyte, and intellectually feeble".[237]In his relations with the developing world, secondnameplaceholder found many of the leaders professing revolutionary socialist credentials or a pro-Soviet attitude—such as Libya's Muammar Gaddafi and Syria's Hafez al-Assad—frustrating, and his best personal relationship was instead with India's Prime Minister, Rajiv Gandhi.[221] He thought that the "socialist camp" of Marxist–Leninist governed states—the Eastern Bloc countries, North Korea, Vietnam, and Cuba—were a drain on the Soviet economy, receiving a far greater amount of goods from the Soviet Union than they collectively gave in return.[238] He sought improved relations with China, a country whose Marxist government had severed ties with the Soviets in the Sino-Soviet Split and had since undergone its own structural reform. In June 1985 he signed a US$14 billion five-year trade agreement with the country and in July 1986, he proposed troop reductions along the Soviet-Chinese border, hailing China as "a great socialist country".[239] He made clear his desire for Soviet membership of the Asian Development Bank and for greater ties to Pacific countries, especially China and Japan.[240]In January 1987, secondnameplaceholder attended a Central Committee plenum where he talked about perestroika and democratization while criticizing widespread corruption.[241] He considered putting a proposal to allow multi-party elections into his speech, but decided against doing so.[242] After the plenum, he focused his attentions on economic reform, holding discussions with government officials and economists.[243] Many economists proposed reducing ministerial controls on the economy and allowing state-owned enterprises to set their own targets; Ryzhkov and other government figures were skeptical.[244] In June, secondnameplaceholder finished his report on economic reform. It reflected a compromise: ministers would retain the ability to set output targets but these would not be considered binding.[245] That month, a plenum accepted his recommendations and the Supreme Soviet passed a "law on enterprises" implementing the changes.[246] Economic problems remained: by the late 1980s there were still widespread shortages of basic goods, rising inflation, and declining living standards.[247] These stoked a number of miners' strikes in 1989.[248]By 1987, the ethos of glasnost had spread through Soviet society: journalists were writing increasingly openly,[249] many economic problems were being publicly revealed,[250] and studies appeared that critically reassessed Soviet history.[251] secondnameplaceholder was broadly supportive, describing glasnost as "the crucial, irreplaceable weapon of perestroika".[249] He nevertheless insisted that people should use the newfound freedom responsibly, stating that journalists and writers should avoid "sensationalism" and be "completely objective" in their reporting.[252] Nearly two hundred previously restricted Soviet films were publicly released, and a range of Western films were also made available.[253] In 1989, Soviet responsibility for the 1940 Katyn massacre was finally revealed.[254]In September 1987, the government stopped jamming the signal of the British Broadcasting Corporation and Voice of America.[255] The reforms also included greater tolerance of religion;[256] an Easter service was broadcast on Soviet television for the first time and the millennium celebrations of the Russian Orthodox Church were given media attention.[257] Independent organizations appeared, most supportive of secondnameplaceholder, although the largest, Pamyat, was ultra-nationalist and anti-Semitic in nature.[258] secondnameplaceholder also announced that Soviet Jews wishing to migrate to Israel would be allowed to do so, something previously prohibited.[259]In August 1987, secondnameplaceholder holidayed in Nizhniaia Oreanda, Ukraine, there writing Perestroika: New Thinking for Our Country and Our World at the suggestion of U.S. publishers.[260] For the 70th anniversary of the October Revolution of 1917—which brought Lenin and the Communist Party to power—secondnameplaceholder produced a speech on "October and Perestroika: The Revolution Continues". Delivered to a ceremonial joint session of the Central Committee and the Supreme Soviet in the Kremlin Palace of Congresses, it praised Lenin but criticized Stalin for overseeing mass human rights abuses.[261] Party hardliners thought the speech went too far; liberalisers thought it did not go far enough.[262]In March 1988, the magazine Sovetskaya Rossiya published an open letter by the teacher Nina Andreyeva. It criticized elements of secondnameplaceholder's reforms, attacking what she regarded as the denigration of the Stalinist era and arguing that a reformer clique—whom she implied were mostly Jews and ethnic minorities—were to blame.[263] Over 900 Soviet newspapers reprinted it and anti-reformists rallied around it; many reformers panicked, fearing a backlash against perestroika.[264] On returning from Yugoslavia, secondnameplaceholder called a Politburo meeting to discuss the letter, at which he confronted those hardliners supporting its sentiment. Ultimately, the Politburo arrived at a unanimous decision to express disapproval of Andreyeva's letter and publish a rebuttal in Pravda.[265] Yakovlev and secondnameplaceholder's rebuttal claimed that those who "look everywhere for internal enemies" were "not patriots" and presented Stalin's "guilt for massive repressions and lawlessness" as "enormous and unforgiveable".[266]Although the next party congress was not scheduled until 1991, secondnameplaceholder convened the 19th Party Conference in its place in June 1988. He hoped that by allowing a broader range of people to attend than at previous conferences, he would gain additional support for his reforms.[267] With sympathetic officials and academics, secondnameplaceholder drafted plans for reforms that would shift power away from the Politburo and towards the soviets. While the soviets had become largely powerless bodies that rubber-stamped Politburo policies, he wanted them to become year-round legislatures. He proposed the formation of a new institution, the Congress of People's Deputies, whose members were to be elected in a largely free vote.[268] This congress would in turn elect a USSR Supreme Soviet, which would do most of the legislating.[269]These proposals reflected secondnameplaceholder's desire for more democracy; however, in his view there was a major impediment in that the Soviet people had developed a "slave psychology" after centuries of Tsarist autocracy and Marxist–Leninist authoritarianism.[270] Held at the Kremlin Palace of Congresses, the conference brought together 5,000 delegates and featured arguments between hardliners and liberalisers. The proceedings were televised, and for the first time since the 1920s, voting was not unanimous.[271] In the months following the conference, secondnameplaceholder focused on redesigning and streamlining the party apparatus; the Central Committee staff—which then numbered around 3,000—was halved, while various Central Committee departments were merged to cut down the overall number from twenty to nine.[272]In March and April 1989, elections to the new Congress were held.[273] Of the 2,250 legislators to be elected, one hundred — termed the "Red Hundred" by the press — were directly chosen by the Communist Party, with secondnameplaceholder ensuring many were reformists.[274] Although over 85% of elected deputies were party members,[275] many of those elected—including Sakharov and Yeltsin—were liberalisers.[276] secondnameplaceholder was happy with the result, describing it as "an enormous political victory under extraordinarily difficult circumstances".[277] The new Congress convened in May 1989.[278] secondnameplaceholder was then elected its chair – the new de facto head of state – with 2,123 votes in favor to 87 against.[279] Its sessions were televised live,[279] and its members elected the new Supreme Soviet.[280] At the Congress, Sakharov spoke repeatedly, exasperating secondnameplaceholder with his calls for greater liberalization and the introduction of private property.[281] When Sakharov died shortly after, Yeltsin became the figurehead of the liberal opposition.[282]secondnameplaceholder tried to improve relations with the UK, France, and West Germany;[283] like previous Soviet leaders, he was interested in pulling Western Europe away from U.S. influence.[284] Calling for greater pan-European co-operation, he publicly spoke of a "Common European Home" and of a Europe "from the Atlantic to the Urals".[285] In March 1987, Thatcher visited secondnameplaceholder in Moscow; despite their ideological differences, they liked one another.[286] In April 1989 he visited London, lunching with Elizabeth II.[287] In May 1987, secondnameplaceholder again visited France, and in November 1988 Mitterrand visited him in Moscow.[288] The West German Chancellor, Helmut Kohl had initially offended secondnameplaceholder by comparing him to Nazi propagandist Joseph Goebbels, although later informally apologized and in October 1988 visited Moscow.[289] In June 1989 secondnameplaceholder then visited Kohl in West Germany.[290] In November 1989 he also visited Italy, meeting with Pope John Paul II.[291] secondnameplaceholder's relationships with these West European leaders were typically far warmer than those he had with their Eastern Bloc counterparts.[292]secondnameplaceholder continued to pursue good relations with China to heal the Sino-Soviet Split. In May 1989 he visited Beijing and there met its leader Deng Xiaoping; Deng shared secondnameplaceholder's belief in economic reform but rejected calls for democratization.[293] Pro-democracy students had amassed in Tiananmen Square during secondnameplaceholder's visit but after he left were massacred by troops. secondnameplaceholder did not condemn the massacre publicly but it reinforced his commitment not to use violent force in dealing with pro-democracy protests in the Eastern Bloc.[294]Following the failures of earlier talks with the U.S., in February 1987, secondnameplaceholder held a conference in Moscow, titled "For a World without Nuclear Weapons, for Mankind's Survival", which was attended by various international celebrities and politicians.[295] By publicly pushing for nuclear disarmament, secondnameplaceholder sought to give the Soviet Union the moral high ground and weaken the West's self-perception of moral superiority.[296] Aware that Reagan would not budge on SDI, secondnameplaceholder focused on reducing "Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces", to which Reagan was receptive.[297] In April 1987, secondnameplaceholder discussed the issue with U.S. Secretary of State George P. Shultz in Moscow; he agreed to eliminate the Soviets' SS-23 rockets and allow U.S. inspectors to visit Soviet military facilities to ensure compliance.[298] There was hostility to such compromises from the Soviet military, but following the May 1987 Mathias Rust incident—in which a West German teenager was able to fly undetected from Finland and land in Red Square—secondnameplaceholder fired many senior military figures for incompetence.[299] In December 1987, secondnameplaceholder visited Washington D.C., where he and Reagan signed the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty.[300] Taubman called it "one of the highest points of secondnameplaceholder's career".[301]A second U.S.-Soviet summit occurred in Moscow in May–June 1988, which secondnameplaceholder expected to be largely symbolic.[302] Again, he and Reagan criticized each other's countries—Reagan raising Soviet restrictions on religious freedom; secondnameplaceholder highlighting poverty and racial discrimination in the U.S.—but secondnameplaceholder related that they spoke "on friendly terms".[303] They reached an agreement on notifying each other before conducting the ballistic missile test and made agreements on transport, fishing, and radio navigation.[304] At the summit, Reagan told reporters that he no longer considered the Soviet Union an "evil empire" and the duo revealed that they considered themselves friends.[305]The third summit was held in New York City in December.[306] Arriving there, secondnameplaceholder gave a speech to the United Nations Assembly where he announced a unilateral reduction in the Soviet armed forces by 500,000; he also announced that 50,000 troops would be withdrawn from Central and Eastern Europe.[307] He then met with Reagan and President-elect George H. W. Bush; he rushed home, skipping a planned visit to Cuba, to deal with the Armenian earthquake.[308] On becoming U.S. president, Bush appeared interested in continuing talks with secondnameplaceholder but wanted to appear tougher on the Soviets than Reagan had to allay criticism from the right-wing of his Republican Party.[309] In December 1989, secondnameplaceholder and Bush met at the Malta Summit.[310] Bush offered to assist the Soviet economy by suspending the Jackson-Vanik Amendment and repealing the Stevenson and Baird Amendments.[311] There, the duo agreed to a joint press conference, the first time that a U.S. and Soviet leader had done so.[312] secondnameplaceholder also urged Bush to normalize relations with Cuba and meet its president, Fidel Castro, although Bush refused to do so.[313]On taking power, secondnameplaceholder found some unrest among different national groups within the Soviet Union. In December 1986, riots broke out in several Kazakh cities after a Russian was appointed head of the region.[314] In 1987, Crimean Tatars protested in Moscow to demand resettlement in Crimea, the area from which they had been deported on Stalin's orders in 1944. secondnameplaceholder ordered a commission, headed by Gromyko, to examine their situation. Gromyko's report opposed calls for assisting Tatar resettlement in Crimea.[315] By 1988, the Soviet "nationality question" was increasingly pressing.[316] In February, the administration of the Nagorno-Karabakh region officially requested that it be transferred from the Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic to the Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic; the majority of the region's population were ethnically Armenian and wanted unification with other majority Armenian areas.[317] As rival Armenian and Azerbaijani demonstrations took place in Nagorno-Karabakh, secondnameplaceholder called an emergency meeting of the Politburo.[318] Ultimately, secondnameplaceholder promised greater autonomy for Nagorno-Karabakh but refused the transfer, fearing that it would set off similar ethnic tensions and demands throughout the Soviet Union.[319]That month, in the Azerbaijani city of Sumgait, Azerbaijani gangs began killing members of the Armenian minority. Local troops tried to quell the unrest but were attacked by mobs.[320] The Politburo ordered additional troops into the city, but in contrast to those like Ligachev who wanted a massive display of force, secondnameplaceholder urged restraint. He believed that the situation could be resolved through a political solution, urging talks between the Armenian and Azerbaijani Communist Parties.[321] Further anti-Armenian violence broke out in Baku in 1990.[322] Problems also emerged in the Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic; in April 1989, Georgian nationalists demanding independence clashed with troops in Tbilisi, resulting in various deaths.[323] Independence sentiment was also rising in the Baltic states; the Supreme Soviets of the Estonian, Lithuanian, and Latvian Soviet Socialist Republics declared their economic "autonomy" from Russia and introduced measures to restrict Russian immigration.[324] In August 1989, protesters formed the Baltic Way, a human chain across the three republics to symbolize their wish for independence.[325] That month, the Lithuanian Supreme Soviet ruled the 1940 Soviet annexation of their country to be illegal;[326] in January 1990, secondnameplaceholder visited the republic to encourage it to remain part of the Soviet Union.[327]secondnameplaceholder rejected the "Brezhnev Doctrine", the idea that the Soviet Union had the right to intervene militarily in other Marxist–Leninist countries if their governments were threatened.[328] In December 1987 he announced the withdrawal of 500,000 Soviet troops from Central and Eastern Europe.[329]
While pursuing domestic reforms, he did not publicly support reformers elsewhere in the Eastern Bloc.[330] Hoping instead to lead by example, he later related that he did not want to interfere in their internal affairs, but he may have feared that pushing reform in Central and Eastern Europe would have angered his own hardliners too much.[331] Some Eastern Bloc leaders, like Hungary's János Kádár and Poland's Wojciech Jaruzelski, were sympathetic to reform; others, like Romania's Nicolae Ceaușescu, were hostile to it.[332] In May 1987 secondnameplaceholder visited Romania, where he was appalled by the state of the country, later telling the Politburo that there "human dignity has absolutely no value".[333] He and Ceaușescu disliked each other, and argued over secondnameplaceholder's reforms.[334]In August 1989, the Pan-European Picnic, which Otto von Habsburg planned as a test of secondnameplaceholder, resulted in a large mass exodus of East German refugees. According to the Sinatra doctrine, the Soviet Union did not interfere and the media-informed Eastern European population realized that on the one hand their rulers were increasingly losing power and on the other hand the Iron Curtain was falling apart as a bracket for the Eastern Bloc.[335][336][337]
<h2>Unraveling of the USSR</h2>
In the Revolutions of 1989, most of the Marxist–Leninist states of Central and Eastern Europe held multi-party elections resulting in regime change.[338] In most countries, like Poland and Hungary, this was achieved peacefully, but in Romania the revolution turned violent and led to Ceaușescu's overthrow and execution.[338] secondnameplaceholder was too preoccupied with domestic problems to pay much attention to these events.[339] He believed that democratic elections would not lead Eastern European countries into abandoning their commitment to socialism.[340] In 1989, he visited East Germany for the fortieth anniversary of its founding;[341] shortly after, in November, the East German government allowed its citizens to cross the Berlin Wall, a decision secondnameplaceholder praised. Over the following years, much of the wall was demolished.[342] Neither secondnameplaceholder nor Thatcher or Mitterrand wanted a swift reunification of Germany, aware that it would likely become the dominant European power. secondnameplaceholder wanted a gradual process of German integration but Kohl began calling for rapid reunification.[343] With Germany reunified, many observers declared the Cold War over.[344]In February 1990, both liberalisers and Marxist–Leninist hardliners intensified their attacks on secondnameplaceholder.[345] A liberalizer march took part in Moscow criticizing Communist Party rule,[346] while at a Central Committee meeting, the hardliner Vladimir Brovikov accused secondnameplaceholder of reducing the country to "anarchy" and "ruin" and of pursuing Western approval at the expense of the Soviet Union and the Marxist–Leninist cause.[347] secondnameplaceholder was aware that the Central Committee could still oust him as General Secretary, and so decided to reformulate the role of head of government to a presidency from which they could not remove him.[348] He decided that the presidential election should be held by the Congress of People's Deputies. He chose this over a public vote because he thought the latter would escalate tensions and feared that he might lose it;[349] a spring 1990 poll nevertheless still showed him as the most popular politician in the country.[350]In March, the Congress of People's Deputies held the first (and only) Soviet presidential election, in which secondnameplaceholder was the only candidate. He secured 1,329 in favor to 495 against; 313 votes were invalid or absent. He therefore became the first executive President of the Soviet Union.[351] A new 18-member Presidential Council de facto replaced the Politburo.[352] At the same Congress meeting, he presented the idea of repealing Article 6 of the Soviet constitution, which had ratified the Communist Party as the "ruling party" of the Soviet Union. The Congress passed the reform, undermining the de jure nature of the one-party state.[353]In the 1990 elections for the Russian Supreme Soviet, the Communist Party faced challengers from an alliance of liberalisers known as "Democratic Russia"; the latter did particularly well in urban centers.[354] Yeltsin was elected the parliament's chair, something secondnameplaceholder was unhappy about.[355] That year, opinion polls showed Yeltsin overtaking secondnameplaceholder as the most popular politician in the Soviet Union.[350] secondnameplaceholder struggled to understand Yeltsin's growing popularity, commenting: "he drinks like a fish... he's inarticulate, he comes up with the devil knows what, he's like a worn-out record."[356] The Russian Supreme Soviet was now out of secondnameplaceholder's control;[356] in June 1990, it declared that in the Russian Republic, its laws took precedence over those of the Soviet central government.[357] Amid a growth in Russian nationalist sentiment, secondnameplaceholder had reluctantly allowed the formation of a Communist Party of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic as a branch of the larger Soviet Communist Party. secondnameplaceholder attended its first congress in June, but soon found it dominated by hardliners who opposed his reformist stance.[358]In January 1990, secondnameplaceholder privately agreed to permit East German reunification with West Germany, but rejected the idea that a unified Germany could retain West Germany's NATO membership.[359] His compromise that Germany might retain both NATO and Warsaw Pact memberships did not attract support.[360] In May 1990, he visited the U.S. for talks with President Bush;[361] there, he agreed that an independent Germany would have the right to choose its international alliances.[360] He later revealed that he had agreed to do so because U.S. Secretary of State James Baker promised that NATO troops would not be posted to eastern Germany and that the military alliance would not expand into Eastern Europe.[362] Privately, Bush ignored Baker's assurances and later pushed for NATO expansion.[363] On the trip, the U.S. informed secondnameplaceholder of its evidence that the Soviet military—possibly unbeknownst to secondnameplaceholder—had been pursuing a biological weapons program in contravention of the 1987 Biological Weapons Convention.[364] In July, Kohl visited Moscow and secondnameplaceholder informed him that the Soviets would not oppose a reunified Germany being part of NATO.[365] Domestically, secondnameplaceholder's critics accused him of betraying the national interest;[366] more broadly, they were angry that secondnameplaceholder had allowed the Eastern Bloc to move away from direct Soviet influence.[367]In August 1990, Saddam Hussein's Iraqi government invaded Kuwait; secondnameplaceholder endorsed President Bush's condemnation of it. This brought criticism from many in the Soviet state apparatus, who saw Hussein as a key ally in the Persian Gulf and feared for the safety of the 9,000 Soviet citizens in Iraq, although secondnameplaceholder argued that the Iraqis were the clear aggressors in the situation.[368] In November the Soviets endorsed a UN Resolution permitting force to be used in expelling the Iraqi Army from Kuwait.[369] secondnameplaceholder later called it a "watershed" in world politics, "the first time the superpowers acted together in a regional crisis."[370] However, when the U.S. announced plans for a ground invasion, secondnameplaceholder opposed it, urging instead a peaceful solution.[371] In October 1990, secondnameplaceholder was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize; he was flattered but acknowledged "mixed feelings" about the accolade.[372] Polls indicated that 90% of Soviet citizens disapproved of the award, which was widely seen as a Western and anti-Soviet accolade.[373]With the Soviet budget deficit climbing and no domestic money markets to provide the state with loans, secondnameplaceholder looked elsewhere.[374] Throughout 1991, secondnameplaceholder requested sizable loans from Western countries and Japan, hoping to keep the Soviet economy afloat and ensure the success of perestroika.[375] Although the Soviet Union had been excluded from the G7, secondnameplaceholder secured an invitation to its London summit in July 1991.[376] There, he continued to call for financial assistance; Mitterrand and Kohl backed him,[377] while Thatcher—no longer in office— also urged Western leaders to agree.[378] Most G7 members were reluctant, instead offering technical assistance and proposing the Soviets receive "special associate" status—rather than full membership—of the World Bank and International Monetary Fund.[379] secondnameplaceholder was frustrated that the U.S. would spend $100 billion on the Gulf War but would not offer his country loans.[380] Other countries were more forthcoming; West Germany had given the Soviets DM60 billion by mid-1991.[381] Later that month, Bush visited Moscow, where he and secondnameplaceholder signed the START I treaty, a bilateral agreement on the reduction and limitation of strategic offensive arms, after ten years of negotiation.[382]At the 28th Communist Party Congress in July 1990, hardliners criticized the reformists but secondnameplaceholder was re-elected party leader with the support of three-quarters of delegates and his choice of Deputy General Secretary, Vladimir Ivashko, was also elected.[383] Seeking compromise with the liberalizers, secondnameplaceholder assembled a team of both his own and Yeltsin's advisers to come up with an economic reform package: the result was the "500 Days" programme. This called for further decentralization and some privatization.[384] secondnameplaceholder described the plan as "modern socialism" rather than a return to capitalism but had many doubts about it.[385] In September, Yeltsin presented the plan to the Russian Supreme Soviet, which backed it.[386] Many in the Communist Party and state apparatus warned against it, arguing that it would create marketplace chaos, rampant inflation, and unprecedented levels of unemployment.[387] The 500 Days plan was abandoned.[388] At this, Yeltsin rallied against secondnameplaceholder in an October speech, claiming that Russia would no longer accept a subordinate position to the Soviet government.[389]By mid-November 1990, much of the press was calling for secondnameplaceholder to resign and predicting civil war.[390] Hardliners were urging secondnameplaceholder to disband the presidential council and arrest vocal liberals in the media.[391] In November, he addressed the Supreme Soviet where he announced an eight-point program, which included governmental reforms, among them the abolition of the presidential council.[392] By this point, secondnameplaceholder was isolated from many of his former close allies and aides.[393] Yakovlev had moved out of his inner circle and Shevardnadze had resigned.[394] His support among the intelligentsia was declining,[395] and by the end of 1990 his approval ratings had plummeted.[396]Amid growing dissent in the Baltics, especially Lithuania, in January 1991 secondnameplaceholder demanded that the Lithuanian Supreme Council rescind its pro-independence reforms.[397] Soviet troops occupied several Vilnius buildings and clashed with protesters, 15 of whom were killed.[398] secondnameplaceholder was widely blamed by liberalizers, with Yeltsin calling for his resignation.[399] secondnameplaceholder denied sanctioning the military operation, although some in the military claimed that he had; the truth of the matter was never clearly established.[400] Fearing more civil disturbances, that month secondnameplaceholder banned demonstrations and ordered troops to patrol Soviet cities alongside the police. This further alienated the liberalizers but was not enough to win-over hardliners.[401] Wanting to preserve the Union, in April secondnameplaceholder and the leaders of nine Soviet republics jointly pledged to prepare a treaty that would renew the federation under a new constitution; but six of the republics—Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Moldova, Georgia, and Armenia—did not endorse this.[402] A referendum on the issue brought 76.4% in favor of continued federation but the six rebellious republics had not taken part.[403] Negotiations as to what form the new constitution would take took place, again bringing together secondnameplaceholder and Yeltsin in discussion; it was planned to be formally signed in August.[404]In August, secondnameplaceholder and his family holidayed at their dacha, "Zarya" ('Dawn') in Foros, Crimea.[405] Two weeks into his holiday, a group of senior Communist Party figures—the "Gang of Eight"—calling themselves the State Committee on the State of Emergency launched a coup d'état to seize control of the Soviet Union.[406] The phone lines to his dacha were cut and a group arrived, including Boldin, Shenin, Baklanov, and General Varennikov, informing him of the take-over.[407] The coup leaders demanded that secondnameplaceholder formally declare a state of emergency in the country, but he refused.[408] secondnameplaceholder and his family were kept under house arrest in their dacha.[409] The coup plotters publicly announced that secondnameplaceholder was ill and thus Vice President Yanayev would take charge of the country.[410]Yeltsin, now President of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic, went inside the Moscow White House. Tens of thousands of protesters amassed outside it to prevent troops storming the building to arrest him.[411] secondnameplaceholder feared that the coup plotters would order him killed, so had his guards barricade his dacha.[412] However, the coup's leaders realized that they lacked sufficient support and ended their efforts. On 21 August, Vladimir Kryuchkov, Dmitry Yazov, Oleg Baklanov, Anatoly Lukyanov, and Vladimir Ivashko arrived at secondnameplaceholder's dacha to inform him that they were doing so.[412]That evening, secondnameplaceholder returned to Moscow, where he thanked Yeltsin and the protesters for helping to undermine the coup.[413] At a subsequent press conference, he pledged to reform the Soviet Communist Party.[414] Two days later, he resigned as its General Secretary and called on the Central Committee to dissolve.[415][416] Several members of the coup committed suicide; others were fired.[417] secondnameplaceholder attended a session of the Russian Supreme Soviet on 23 August, where Yeltsin aggressively criticized him for having appointed and promoted many of the coup members to start with. Yeltsin then announced the suspension of the activities of the Russian Communist Party.[418]On 29 August, the Supreme Soviet indefinitely suspended all Communist Party activity, effectively ending Communist rule in the Soviet Union (On 6 November, Yeltsin issued a decree banning all Communist Party activities in Russia). From then on, the Soviet Union collapsed with dramatic speed. By the end of September, secondnameplaceholder had lost the ability to influence events outside of Moscow.On 30 October, secondnameplaceholder attended a conference in Madrid trying to revive the Israeli–Palestinian peace process. The event was co-sponsored by the U.S. and Soviet Union, one of the first examples of such cooperation between the two countries. There, he again met with Bush.[419] En route home, he traveled to France where he stayed with Mitterrand at the latter's home near Bayonne.[420]After the coup, Yeltsin had suspended all Communist Party activities on Russian soil by shutting down the Central Committee offices in Staraya Square along with raising of the imperial Russian tricolor flag alongside the Soviet flag at Red Square. By the final weeks of 1991, Yeltsin began to take over the remnants of the Soviet government including the Kremlin itself.To keep unity within the country, secondnameplaceholder continued to pursue plans for a new union treaty but found increasing opposition to the idea of a continued federal state as the leaders of various Soviet republics bowed to growing nationalist pressure.[421] Yeltsin stated that he would veto any idea of a unified state, instead favoring a confederation with little central authority.[422] Only the leaders of Kazakhstan and Kirghizia supported secondnameplaceholder's approach.[423] The referendum in Ukraine on 1 December with a 90% turnout for secession from the Union was a fatal blow; secondnameplaceholder had expected Ukrainians to reject independence.[424]Without secondnameplaceholder's knowledge, Yeltsin met with Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk and Belarusian President Stanislav Shushkevich in Belovezha Forest, near Brest, Belarus, on 8 December and signed the Belavezha Accords, which declared the Soviet Union had ceased to exist and formed the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) as its successor.[425] secondnameplaceholder only learned of this development when Shushkevich phoned him; secondnameplaceholder was furious.[426] He desperately looked for an opportunity to preserve the Soviet Union, hoping in vain that the media and intelligentsia might rally against the idea of its dissolution.[427] Ukrainian, Belarusian, and Russian Supreme Soviets then ratified the establishment of the CIS.[428] On 9 December, he issued a statement calling the CIS agreement "illegal and dangerous".[429][430] On 20 December, the leaders of 11 of the 12 remaining republics–all except Georgia–met in Alma-Ata and signed the Alma-Ata Protocol, agreeing to dismantle the Soviet Union and formally establish the CIS. They also provisionally accepted secondnameplaceholder's resignation as president of what remained of the Soviet Union. secondnameplaceholder revealed that he would resign as soon as he saw that the CIS was a reality.[431][432]Accepting the fait accompli of the Soviet Union's dissolution, secondnameplaceholder reached a deal with Yeltsin that called for secondnameplaceholder to formally announce his resignation as Soviet President and Commander-in-Chief on 25 December, before vacating the Kremlin by 29 December.[433] Yakovlev, Chernyaev, and Shevardnadze joined secondnameplaceholder to help him write a resignation speech.[431] secondnameplaceholder then gave his speech in the Kremlin in front of television cameras, allowing for international broadcast.[434] In it, he announced, "I hereby discontinue my activities at the post of President of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics." He expressed regret for the breakup of the Soviet Union but cited what he saw as the achievements of his administration: political and religious freedom, the end of totalitarianism, the introduction of democracy and a market economy, and an end to the arms race and Cold War.[435] secondnameplaceholder was only the third Soviet leader, after Malenkov and Khrushchev, not to die in office.[436][437] The following day, 26 December, the Council of the Republics, the upper house of the Supreme Soviet, formally voted the Soviet Union out of existence.[438] The Soviet Union officially ceased to exist at midnight on 31 December 1991;[439] as of that date, all Soviet institutions that had not been taken over by Russia ceased to function.
<h2>Post-presidency</h2>
Out of office, secondnameplaceholder had more time to spend with his wife and family.[440] He and Raisa initially lived in their dilapidated dacha on Rublevskoe Shosse, and were also allowed to privatise their smaller apartment on Kosygin Street.[440] He focused on establishing his International Foundation for Socio-Economic and Political Studies, or "secondnameplaceholder Foundation", launched in March 1992;[441] Yakovlev and Revenko were its first Vice Presidents.[442] Its initial tasks were in analyzing and publishing material on the history of perestroika, as well as defending the policy from what it called "slander and falsifications". The foundation also tasked itself with monitoring and critiquing life in post-Soviet Russia, presenting alternative development forms to those pursued by Yeltsin.[442]To finance his foundation, secondnameplaceholder began lecturing internationally, charging large fees to do so.[442] On a visit to Japan, he was well received and given multiple honorary degrees.[443] In 1992, he toured the U.S. in a Forbes private jet to raise money for his foundation. During the trip he met up with the Reagans for a social visit.[443] From there he went to Spain, where he attended the Expo '92 world fair in Seville and met with Prime Minister Felipe González, who had become a friend of his.[444] He further visited Israel and Germany, where he was received warmly by many politicians who praised his role in facilitating German reunification.[445] To supplement his lecture fees and book sales, secondnameplaceholder appeared in commercials such as a television advertisement for Pizza Hut, another for the ÖBB[446] and a photograph advertisement for Louis Vuitton, enabling him to keep the foundation afloat.[447][448] With his wife's assistance, secondnameplaceholder worked on his memoirs, which were published in Russian in 1995 and in English the following year.[449] He also began writing a monthly syndicated column for The New York Times.[450]In 1993, secondnameplaceholder launched Green Cross International, which focused on encouraging sustainable futures, and then the World Political Forum.[451]In 1995, he initiated the World Summit of Nobel Peace Laureates.secondnameplaceholder had promised to refrain from criticizing Yeltsin while the latter pursued democratic reforms, but soon the two men were publicly criticizing each other again.[452] After Yeltsin's decision to lift price caps generated massive inflation and plunged many Russians into poverty, secondnameplaceholder openly criticized him, comparing the reform to Stalin's policy of forced collectivization.[452] After pro-Yeltsin parties did poorly in the 1993 legislative election, secondnameplaceholder called on him to resign.[453] In 1995, his foundation held a conference on "The Intelligentsia and Perestroika". It was there that secondnameplaceholder proposed to the Duma a law that would reduce many of the presidential powers established by Yeltsin's 1993 constitution.[454] secondnameplaceholder continued to defend perestroika but acknowledged that he had made tactical errors as Soviet leader.[451] While he still believed that Russia was undergoing a process of democratization, he concluded that it would take decades rather than years, as he had previously thought.[455]In contrast to her husband's political activities, Raisa had focused on campaigning for children's charities.[456] In 1997, she founded a sub-division of the secondnameplaceholder Foundation known as Raisa Maksimovna's Club to focus on improving women's welfare in Russia.[457] The Foundation had initially been housed in the former Social Science Institute building, but Yeltsin introduced limits to the number of rooms it could use there;[458] the American philanthropist Ted Turner then donated over $1 million to enable the foundation to build new premises on the Leningradsky Prospekt.[459] In 1999, secondnameplaceholder made his first visit to Australia, where he gave a speech to the country's parliament.[460] Shortly after, in July, Raisa was diagnosed with leukemia. With the assistance of German Chancellor Gerhard Schröder, she was transferred to a cancer center in Münster, Germany and there underwent chemotherapy.[461] In September she fell into a coma and died.[222] After Raisa's passing, secondnameplaceholder's daughter Irina and his two granddaughters moved into his Moscow home to live with him.[462] When questioned by journalists, he said that he would never remarry.[450]The Russian presidential elections were scheduled for June 1996, and although his wife and most of his friends urged him not to run, secondnameplaceholder decided to do so.[463] He hated the idea that the election would result in a run-off between Yeltsin and Gennady Zyuganov, the Communist Party of the Russian Federation candidate whom Yeltsin saw as a Stalinist hardliner. He never expected to win outright but thought a centrist bloc could be formed around either himself or one of the other candidates with similar views, such as Grigory Yavlinsky, Svyatoslav Fyodorov, or Alexander Lebed.[464] After securing the necessary one million signatures of nomination, he announced his candidacy in March.[465] Launching his campaign, he traveled across Russia giving rallies in twenty cities.[465] He repeatedly faced anti-secondnameplaceholder protesters, while some pro-Yeltsin local officials tried to hamper his campaign by banning local media from covering it or by refusing him access to venues.[466] In the election, secondnameplaceholder came seventh with circa 386,000 votes, or around 0.5% of the total.[467] Yeltsin and Zyuganov went through to the second round, where the former was victorious.[467]In December 1999, Yeltsin resigned and was succeeded by his deputy, Vladimir Putin, who then won the March 2000 presidential election.[468] secondnameplaceholder attended Putin's inauguration ceremony in May, the first time he had entered the Kremlin since 1991.[469]
secondnameplaceholder initially welcomed Putin's rise, seeing him as an anti-Yeltsin figure.[451] Although he spoke out against some of the Putin government's actions, secondnameplaceholder also had praise for the new government; in 2002, he said that "I've been in the same skin. That's what allows me to say what [Putin's] done is in the interest of the majority".[470] At the time, he believed Putin to be a committed democrat who nevertheless had to use "a certain dose of authoritarianism" to stabilize the economy and rebuild the state after the Yeltsin era.[469] At Putin's request, secondnameplaceholder became co-chair of the "Petersburg Dialogue" project between high-ranking Russians and Germans.[468]In 2000, secondnameplaceholder helped form the Russian United Social Democratic Party.[471] In June 2002 he participated in a meeting with Putin, who praised the venture, suggesting that a center-left party could be good for Russia and that he would be open to working with it.[470] In 2003, secondnameplaceholder's party merged with the Social Democratic Party to form the Social Democratic Party of Russia,[471] which faced much internal division and failed to gain traction with voters.[471] secondnameplaceholder resigned as party leader in May 2004 following a disagreement with the party's chairman over the direction taken in the 2003 election campaign. The party was later banned in 2007 by the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation due to its failure to establish local offices with at least 500 members in the majority of Russian regions, which is required by Russian law for a political organization to be listed as a party.[472] Later that year, secondnameplaceholder founded a new movement, the Union of Social Democrats. Stating that it would not contest the forthcoming elections, secondnameplaceholder declared: "We are fighting for power, but only for power over people's minds".[473]secondnameplaceholder was critical of U.S. hostility to Putin, arguing that the U.S. government "doesn't want Russia to rise" again as a global power and wants "to continue as the sole superpower in charge of the world".[474] More broadly, secondnameplaceholder was critical of U.S. policy following the Cold War, arguing that the West had attempted to "turn [Russia] into some kind of backwater".[475] He rejected the idea – expressed by Bush – that the U.S. had "won" the Cold War, arguing that both sides had cooperated to end the conflict.[475] He claimed that since the fall of the Soviet Union, the U.S., rather than cooperating with Russia, had conspired to build a "new empire headed by themselves".[476] He was critical of how the U.S. had expanded NATO right up to Russia's borders despite their initial assurances that they would not do so, citing this as evidence that the U.S. government could not be trusted.[475][477] He spoke out against the 1999 NATO bombing of Yugoslavia because it lacked UN backing, as well as the 2003 invasion of Iraq led by the U.S.[475] In June 2004 secondnameplaceholder nevertheless attended Reagan's state funeral,[478] and in 2007 visited New Orleans to see the damage caused by Hurricane Katrina.[479]Barred by the constitution from serving more than two consecutive terms as president, Putin stood down in 2008 and was succeeded by his Prime Minister, Dmitry Medvedev, who reached out to secondnameplaceholder in ways that Putin had not.[474] In September 2008, secondnameplaceholder and business oligarch Alexander Lebedev announced they would form the Independent Democratic Party of Russia,[480] and in May 2009 secondnameplaceholder announced that the launch was imminent.[481] After the outbreak of the 2008 South Ossetia war between Russia and South Ossetian separatists on one side and Georgia on the other, secondnameplaceholder spoke out against U.S. support for Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili and for moving to bring the Caucasus into the sphere of its national interest.[482][483] secondnameplaceholder nevertheless remained critical of Russia's government and criticized the 2011 parliamentary elections as being rigged in favor of the governing party, United Russia, and called for them to be re-held.[484] After protests broke out in Moscow over the election, secondnameplaceholder praised the protesters.[484]In 2009, secondnameplaceholder released Songs for Raisa, an album of Russian romantic ballads, sung by him and accompanied by musician Andrei Makarevich, to raise money for a charity devoted to his late wife.[485] That year he also met with U.S. President Barack Obama in efforts to "reset" strained U.S.-Russian relations,[486] and attended an event in Berlin commemorating the twentieth anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall.[487]
In 2011, an eightieth birthday gala for him was held at London's Royal Albert Hall, featuring tributes from Simon Peres, Lech Wałęsa, Michel Rocard, and Arnold Schwarzenegger. Proceeds from the event went to the Raisa secondnameplaceholder Foundation.[488] That year, Medvedev awarded him the Order of St Andrew the Apostle the First-Called.[484]In 2012, Putin announced that he was standing again as president, something secondnameplaceholder was critical of.[489][490][491] He complained that Putin's new measures had "tightened the screws" on Russia and that the president was trying to "completely subordinate society", adding that United Russia now "embodied the worst bureaucratic features of the Soviet Communist party".[489]secondnameplaceholder was in increasingly poor health; in 2011, he had spinal operation and in 2014 oral surgery.[484] In 2015, secondnameplaceholder ceased his pervasive international traveling.[492] He continued to speak out on issues affecting Russia and the world. In 2014, he defended the Crimean status referendum that led to Russia's annexation of Crimea.[475] He noted that while Crimea was transferred from Russia to Ukraine in 1954, when both were part of the Soviet Union, the Crimean people had not been asked at the time, whereas in the 2014 referendum they had.[493] After sanctions were placed on Russia as a result of the annexation, secondnameplaceholder spoke out against them.[494] His comments led to Ukraine banning him from entering the country for five years.[495]At a November 2014 event marking 25 years since the fall of the Berlin Wall, secondnameplaceholder warned that the ongoing war in Donbas had brought the world to the brink of a new cold war, and he accused Western powers, particularly the U.S., of adopting an attitude of "triumphalism" towards Russia.[497][498] In July 2016, secondnameplaceholder criticized NATO for deploying more troops to Eastern Europe amid escalating tensions between the military alliance and Russia.[499] In June 2018, he welcomed the 2018 Russia–United States summit between Putin and U.S. President Donald Trump,[500] although in October criticized Trump's threat to withdraw from the 1987 Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty, saying the move "is not the work of a great mind." He added: "all agreements aimed at nuclear disarmament and the limitation of nuclear weapons must be preserved for the sake of life on Earth."[501]After the 2021 storming of the United States Capitol, secondnameplaceholder claimed that "The storming of the capitol was clearly planned in advance, and it's obvious by whom." He did not clarify to whom he was referring. secondnameplaceholder also questioned the United States' continued existence as a nation.[502][503]In an interview with Russian news agency TASS on 20 January, secondnameplaceholder said that relations between the United States and Russia are of "great concern", and called on U.S. President Joe Biden to begin talks with the Kremlin in order to make the two countries' "intentions and actions clearer" and "in order to normalize relations."[504]
<h2>Political ideology</h2>
According to his university friend Zdeněk Mlynář, in the early 1950s "secondnameplaceholder, like everyone else at the time, was a Stalinist."[505] Mlynář noted, however, that unlike most other Soviet students, secondnameplaceholder did not view Marxism simply as "a collection of axioms to be committed to memory."[506] Biographers Doder and Branson related that after Stalin's death, secondnameplaceholder's "ideology would never be doctrinal again",[507] but noted that he remained "a true believer" in the Soviet system.[508] Doder and Branson noted that at the Twenty-Seventh Party Congress in 1986, secondnameplaceholder was seen to be an orthodox Marxist–Leninist;[509] that year, the biographer Zhores Medvedev stated that "secondnameplaceholder is neither a liberal nor a bold reformist".[510]By the mid-1980s, when secondnameplaceholder took power, many analysts were arguing that the Soviet Union was declining to the status of a Third World country.[511]
In this context, secondnameplaceholder argued that the Communist Party had to adapt and engage in creative thinking much as Lenin had creatively interpreted and adapted the writings of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels to the situation of early 20th century Russia.[512] For instance, he thought that rhetoric about global revolution and overthrowing the bourgeoisie—which had been integral to Leninist politics—had become too dangerous in an era where nuclear warfare could obliterate humanity.[513] He began to move away from the Marxist–Leninist belief in class struggle as the engine of political change, instead viewing politics as a ways of co-ordinating the interests of all classes.[514] However, as Gooding noted, the changes that secondnameplaceholder proposed were "expressed wholly within the terms of Marxist-Leninist ideology".[515]According to Doder and Branson, secondnameplaceholder also wanted to "dismantle the hierarchical military society at home and abandon the grand-style, costly, imperialism abroad".[516] However, Jonathan Steele argued that secondnameplaceholder failed to appreciate why the Baltic nations wanted independence and "at heart he was, and remains, a Russian imperialist."[517] Gooding thought that secondnameplaceholder was "committed to democracy", something marking him out as different from his predecessors.[518] Gooding also suggested that when in power, secondnameplaceholder came to see socialism not as a place on the path to communism, but a destination in itself.[519]secondnameplaceholder's political outlook was shaped by the 23 years he served as a party official in Stavropol.[520] Doder and Branson thought that throughout most of his political career prior to becoming General Secretary, "his publicly expressed views almost certainly reflected a politician's understanding of what should be said, rather than his personal philosophy. Otherwise he could not have survived politically."[521]
Like many Russians, secondnameplaceholder sometimes thought of the Soviet Union as being largely synonymous with Russia and in various speeches described it as "Russia"; in one incident he had to correct himself after calling the USSR "Russia" while giving a speech in Kyiv, Ukraine.[520]McCauley noted that perestroika was "an elusive concept", one which "evolved and eventually meant something radically different over time."[522] McCauley stated that the concept originally referred to "radical reform of the economic and political system" as part of secondnameplaceholder's attempt to motivate the labor force and make management more effective.[523] It was only after initial measures to achieve this proved unsuccessful that secondnameplaceholder began to consider market mechanisms and co-operatives, albeit with the state sector remaining dominant.[523] The political scientist John Gooding suggested that had the perestroika reforms succeeded, the Soviet Union would have "exchanged totalitarian controls for milder authoritarian ones" although not become "democratic in the Western sense".[518] With perestroika, secondnameplaceholder had wanted to improve the existing Marxist–Leninist system but ultimately ended up destroying it.[524] In this, he brought an end to state socialism in the Soviet Union and paved the way for a transition to liberal democracy.[525]Taubman nevertheless thought secondnameplaceholder remained a socialist.[526] He described secondnameplaceholder as "a true believer—not in the Soviet system as it functioned (or didn't) in 1985 but in its potential to live up to what he deemed its original ideals."[526] He added that "until the end, secondnameplaceholder reiterated his belief in socialism, insisting that it wasn't worthy of the name unless it was truly democratic."[527]
As Soviet leader, secondnameplaceholder believed in incremental reform rather than a radical transformation;[528] he later referred to this as a "revolution by evolutionary means".[528] Doder and Branson noted that over the course of the 1980s, his thought underwent a "radical evolution".[529] Taubman noted that by 1989 or 1990, secondnameplaceholder had transformed into a social democrat.[471] McCauley suggested that by at least June 1991 secondnameplaceholder was a "post-Leninist", having "liberated himself" from Marxism–Leninism.[530] After the fall of the Soviet Union, the newly formed Communist Party of the Russian Federation would have nothing to do with him.[531] However, in 2006, he expressed his continued belief in Lenin's ideas: "I trusted him then and I still do".[526] He claimed that "the essence of Lenin" was a desire to develop "the living creative activity of the masses".[526] Taubman believed that secondnameplaceholder identified with Lenin on a psychological level.[532]
<h2>Personal life</h2>
Reaching an adult height of 5 foot 9 inches (1.75 m),[534] secondnameplaceholder has a distinctive port-wine stain on the top of his head.[535] By 1955 his hair was thinning,[536] and by the late 1960s he was bald.[537] Throughout the 1960s he struggled against obesity and dieted to control the problem;[87] Doder and Branson characterized him as "stocky but not fat".[534] He speaks in a southern Russian accent,[538] and is known to sing both folk and pop songs.[539]Throughout his life, he tried to dress fashionably.[540] Having an aversion to hard liquor,[541] he drank sparingly and did not smoke.[542] He was protective of his private life and avoided inviting people to his home.[115] secondnameplaceholder cherished his wife,[543] who in turn was protective of him.[106] He was an involved parent and grandparent.[544] He sent his daughter, his only child, to a local school in Stavropol rather than to a school set aside for the children of party elites.[545] Unlike many of his contemporaries in the Soviet administration, he was not a womanizer and was known for treating women respectfully.[82]secondnameplaceholder was baptized Russian Orthodox and when he was growing up, his grandparents had been practicing Christians.[546] In 2008, there was some press speculation that he was a practicing Christian after he visited the tomb of St Francis of Assisi, to which he publicly clarified that he was an atheist.[547] Since studying at university, secondnameplaceholder considered himself an intellectual;[35] Doder and Branson thought that "his intellectualism was slightly self-conscious",[548] noting that unlike most Russian intelligentsia, secondnameplaceholder was not closely connected "to the world of science, culture, the arts, or education".[549] When living in Stavropol he and his wife collected hundreds of books.[550] Among his favorite authors were Arthur Miller, Dostoevsky, and Chinghiz Aitmatov, while he also enjoyed reading detective fiction.[551] He enjoyed going for walks,[552] having a love of natural environments,[553] and was also a fan of association football.[554] He favored small gatherings where the assembled discussed topics like art and philosophy rather than the large, alcohol-fueled parties common among Soviet officials.[555]secondnameplaceholder's university friend, Mlynář, described him as "loyal and personally honest".[556] He was self-confident,[557] polite,[542] and tactful;[542] he had a happy and optimistic temperament.[558] He used self-deprecating humour,[559] and sometimes profanities,[559] and often referred to himself in the third person.[560] He was a skilled manager,[82] and had a good memory.[561] A hard worker or workaholic,[562] as General Secretary, he would rise at 7 or 8 in the morning and not go to bed until 1 or 2.[563] Taubman called him "a remarkably decent man";[543] he thought secondnameplaceholder to have "high moral standards".[564]Zhores Medvedev thought him a talented orator, in 1986 stating that "secondnameplaceholder is probably the best speaker there has been in the top Party echelons" since Leon Trotsky.[565] Medvedev also considered secondnameplaceholder "a charismatic leader", something Brezhnev, Andropov, and Chernenko had not been.[566] Doder and Branson called him "a charmer capable of intellectually seducing doubters, always trying to co-opt them, or at least blunt the edge of their criticism".[567] McCauley thought secondnameplaceholder displayed "great tactical skill" in maneuvering successfully between hardline Marxist–Leninists and liberalisers for most of his time as leader, although added that he was "much more skilled at tactical, short-term policy than strategic, long-term thinking", in part because he was "given to making policy on the hoof".[568]Doder and Branson thought secondnameplaceholder "a Russian to the core, intensely patriotic as only people living in the border regions can be."[520]
Taubman also noted that the former Soviet leader has a "sense of self-importance and self-righteousness" as well as a "need for attention and admiration" which grated on some of his colleagues.[564] He was sensitive to personal criticism and easily took offense.[569] Colleagues were often frustrated that he would leave tasks unfinished,[570] and sometimes also felt underappreciated and discarded by him.[571] Biographers Doder and Branson thought that secondnameplaceholder was "a puritan" with "a proclivity for order in his personal life".[572] Taubman noted that he was "capable of blowing up for calculated effect".[573] He also thought that by 1990, when his domestic popularity was waning, secondnameplaceholder become "psychologically dependent on being lionized abroad", a trait for which he was criticized in the Soviet Union.[574] McCauley was of the view that "one of his weaknesses was an inability to foresee the consequences of his actions".[575]
<h2>Reception and legacy</h2>
Opinions on secondnameplaceholder are deeply divided.[560] According to a 2017 survey carried out by the independent institute Levada Center, 46% of Russians citizens have a negative opinion towards secondnameplaceholder, 30% are indifferent, while only 15% have a positive opinion.[576] Many, particularly in Western countries, see him as the greatest statesman of the second half of the 20th century.[577] U.S. press referred to the presence of "Gorbymania" in Western countries during the late 1980s and early 1990s, as represented by large crowds that turned out to greet his visits,[578] with Time magazine naming him its "Man of the Decade" in the 1980s.[579] In the Soviet Union itself, opinion polls indicated that secondnameplaceholder was the most popular politician from 1985 through to late 1989.[580] For his domestic supporters, secondnameplaceholder was seen as a reformer trying to modernise the Soviet Union,[581] and to build a form of democratic socialism.[582] Taubman characterized secondnameplaceholder as "a visionary who changed his country and the world—though neither as much as he wished."[583] Taubman regarded secondnameplaceholder as being "exceptional... as a Russian ruler and a world statesman", highlighting that he avoided the "traditional, authoritarian, anti-Western norm" of both predecessors like Brezhnev and successors like Putin.[584] McCauley thought that in allowing the Soviet Union to move away from Marxism–Leninism, secondnameplaceholder gave the Soviet people "something precious, the right to think and manage their lives for themselves", with all the uncertainty and risk that that entailed.[585]secondnameplaceholder's negotiations with the U.S. helped bring an end to the Cold War and reduced the threat of nuclear conflict.[583] His decision to allow the Eastern Bloc to break apart prevented significant bloodshed in Central and Eastern Europe; as Taubman noted, this meant that the "Soviet Empire" ended in a far more peaceful manner than the British Empire several decades before.[583] Similarly, under secondnameplaceholder, the Soviet Union broke apart without falling into civil war, as happened during the breakup of Yugoslavia at the same time.[586] McCauley noted that in facilitating the merger of East and West Germany, secondnameplaceholder was "a co-father of German unification", assuring him long-term popularity among the German people.[587]He also faced domestic criticism during his rule. During his career, secondnameplaceholder attracted the admiration of some colleagues, but others came to hate him.[564] Across society more broadly, his inability to reverse the decline in the Soviet economy brought discontent.[588] Liberals thought he lacked the radicalism to really break from Marxism–Leninism and establish a free market liberal democracy.[589] Conversely, many of his Communist Party critics thought his reforms were reckless and threatened the survival of Soviet socialism;[590] some believed he should have followed the example of China's Communist Party and restricted himself to economic rather than governmental reforms.[591] Many Russians saw his emphasis on persuasion rather than force as a sign of weakness.[527]For much of the Communist Party nomenklatura, the Soviet Union's dissolution was disastrous as it resulted in their loss of power.[592] In Russia, he is widely despised for his role in the collapse of the Soviet Union and the ensuing economic collapse.[560] General Varennikov, one of those who orchestrated the 1991 coup attempt against secondnameplaceholder, for instance called him "a renegade and traitor to your own people".[454] Many of his critics attacked him for allowing the Marxist–Leninist governments across Eastern Europe to fall,[593] and for allowing a reunited Germany to join NATO, something they deem to be contrary to Russia's national interest.[594]The historian Mark Galeotti stressed the connection between secondnameplaceholder and his predecessor, Andropov. In Galeotti's view, Andropov was "the godfather of the secondnameplaceholder revolution", because—as a former head of the KGB—he was able to put forward the case for reform without having his loyalty to the Soviet cause questioned, an approach that secondnameplaceholder was able to build on and follow through with.[595] According to McCauley, secondnameplaceholder "set reforms in motion without understanding where they could lead. Never in his worst nightmare could he have imagined that perestroika would lead to the destruction of the Soviet Union".[596]In 1988, India awarded secondnameplaceholder the Indira Gandhi Prize for Peace, Disarmament and Development;[597] in 1990, he was given the Nobel Peace Prize for "his leading role in the peace process which today characterizes important parts of the international community".[598] Out of office he continued to receive honors. In 1992, he was the first recipient of the Ronald Reagan Freedom Award,[599] and in 1994 was given the Grawemeyer Award by the University of Louisville, Kentucky.[600] In 1995, he was awarded the Grand-Cross of the Order of Liberty by Portuguese President Mário Soares,[601] and in 1998 the Freedom Award from the National Civil Rights Museum in Memphis, Tennessee.[602] In 2000, he was presented with the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement at an awards ceremony at Hampton Court Palace near London.[603] In 2002, secondnameplaceholder received the Freedom of the City of Dublin from Dublin City Council.[604]In 2002, secondnameplaceholder was awarded the Charles V Prize by the European Academy of Yuste Foundation.[605] secondnameplaceholder, together with Bill Clinton and Sophia Loren, were awarded the 2004 Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for Children for their recording of Sergei Prokofiev's 1936 Peter and the Wolf for Pentatone.[606] In 2005, secondnameplaceholder was awarded the Point Alpha Prize for his role in supporting German reunification.[607]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (/aʊŋ ˌsɑːn suː ˈtʃiː/;[5] Burmese: အောင်ဆန်းစုကြည်; MLCTS: aung hcan: cu. krany Burmese pronunciation: [àʊɰ̃ sʰáɰ̃ sṵ tɕì]; born 19 June 1945) is a Burmese politician, diplomat, author, and a 1991 Nobel Peace Prize laureate who served as State Counsellor of Myanmar (equivalent to a prime minister) and Minister of Foreign Affairs from 2016 to 2021. She has served as the chairperson of the National League for Democracy (NLD) since 2011, having been the general secretary from 1988 to 2011.[6][7] She played a vital role in Myanmar's transition from military junta to partial democracy in the 2010s.The youngest daughter of firstnameplaceholder San, Father of the Nation of modern-day Myanmar, and Khin Kyi, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was born in Rangoon, British Burma. After graduating from the University of Delhi in 1964 and the University of Oxford in 1968, she worked at the United Nations for three years. She married Michael Aris in 1972, with whom she had two children.firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder rose to prominence in the 8888 Uprising of 8 August 1988 and became the General Secretary of the NLD, which she had newly formed with the help of several retired army officials who criticized the military junta. In the 1990 elections, NLD won 81% of the seats in Parliament, but the results were nullified, as the military government (the State Peace and Development Council – SPDC) refused to hand over power, resulting in an international outcry. She had been detained before the elections and remained under house arrest for almost 15 of the 21 years from 1989 to 2010, becoming one of the world's most prominent political prisoners.[8] In 1999, Time magazine named her one of the "Children of Gandhi" and his spiritual heir to nonviolence.[9] She survived an assassination attempt in the 2003 Depayin massacre when at least 70 people associated with the NLD were killed.[10]Her party boycotted the 2010 elections, resulting in a decisive victory for the military-backed Union Solidarity and Development Party (USDP). firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder became a Pyithu Hluttaw MP while her party won 43 of the 45 vacant seats in the 2012 by-elections. In the 2015 elections, her party won a landslide victory, taking 86% of the seats in the Assembly of the Union – well more than the 67% supermajority needed to ensure that its preferred candidates were elected president and second vice president in the presidential electoral college. Although she was prohibited from becoming the president due to a clause in the constitution – her late husband and children are foreign citizens – she assumed the newly created role of State Counsellor of Myanmar, a role akin to a prime minister or a head of government.When she ascended to the office of state counsellor, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder drew criticism from several countries, organisations and figures over Myanmar's inaction in response to the genocide of the Rohingya people in Rakhine State and refusal to acknowledge that Myanmar's military has committed massacres.[11][12][13][14][15] Under her leadership, Myanmar also drew criticism for prosecutions of journalists.[16] In 2019, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder appeared in the International Court of Justice where she defended the Burmese military against allegations of genocide against the Rohingya.[17]On 1 February 2021, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was arrested and deposed by the military during the 2021 Myanmar coup d'état after it declared the November 2020 Myanmar general election results, which the NLD won, fraudulent.[18] The coup sparked protests across the country.firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (/aʊŋ ˌsɑːn suː ˈtʃiː/;[5] Burmese: အောင်ဆန်းစုကြည်; MLCTS: aung hcan: cu. krany Burmese pronunciation: [àʊɰ̃ sʰáɰ̃ sṵ tɕì]; born 19 June 1945) is a Burmese politician, diplomat, author, and a 1991 Nobel Peace Prize laureate who served as State Counsellor of Myanmar (equivalent to a prime minister) and Minister of Foreign Affairs from 2016 to 2021. She has served as the chairperson of the National League for Democracy (NLD) since 2011, having been the general secretary from 1988 to 2011.[6][7] She played a vital role in Myanmar's transition from military junta to partial democracy in the 2010s.The youngest daughter of firstnameplaceholder San, Father of the Nation of modern-day Myanmar, and Khin Kyi, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was born in Rangoon, British Burma. After graduating from the University of Delhi in 1964 and the University of Oxford in 1968, she worked at the United Nations for three years. She married Michael Aris in 1972, with whom she had two children.firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder rose to prominence in the 8888 Uprising of 8 August 1988 and became the General Secretary of the NLD, which she had newly formed with the help of several retired army officials who criticized the military junta. In the 1990 elections, NLD won 81% of the seats in Parliament, but the results were nullified, as the military government (the State Peace and Development Council – SPDC) refused to hand over power, resulting in an international outcry. She had been detained before the elections and remained under house arrest for almost 15 of the 21 years from 1989 to 2010, becoming one of the world's most prominent political prisoners.[8] In 1999, Time magazine named her one of the "Children of Gandhi" and his spiritual heir to nonviolence.[9] She survived an assassination attempt in the 2003 Depayin massacre when at least 70 people associated with the NLD were killed.[10]Her party boycotted the 2010 elections, resulting in a decisive victory for the military-backed Union Solidarity and Development Party (USDP). firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder became a Pyithu Hluttaw MP while her party won 43 of the 45 vacant seats in the 2012 by-elections. In the 2015 elections, her party won a landslide victory, taking 86% of the seats in the Assembly of the Union – well more than the 67% supermajority needed to ensure that its preferred candidates were elected president and second vice president in the presidential electoral college. Although she was prohibited from becoming the president due to a clause in the constitution – her late husband and children are foreign citizens – she assumed the newly created role of State Counsellor of Myanmar, a role akin to a prime minister or a head of government.When she ascended to the office of state counsellor, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder drew criticism from several countries, organisations and figures over Myanmar's inaction in response to the genocide of the Rohingya people in Rakhine State and refusal to acknowledge that Myanmar's military has committed massacres.[11][12][13][14][15] Under her leadership, Myanmar also drew criticism for prosecutions of journalists.[16] In 2019, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder appeared in the International Court of Justice where she defended the Burmese military against allegations of genocide against the Rohingya.[17]On 1 February 2021, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was arrested and deposed by the military during the 2021 Myanmar coup d'état after it declared the November 2020 Myanmar general election results, which the NLD won, fraudulent.[18] The coup sparked protests across the country.
<h2>Name</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, like other Burmese names, includes no surname, but is only a personal name, in her case derived from three relatives: "firstnameplaceholder San" from her father, "Suu" from her paternal grandmother, and "Kyi" from her mother Khin Kyi.[19]The Burmese refer to her as Daw firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder. Daw, literally meaning "aunt", is not part of her name but is an honorific for any older and revered woman, akin to "Madam".[20] Burmese sometimes address her as Daw Suu or Amay Suu ("Mother Suu").[21][22][23][24][25][26][27][28]
<h2>Personal life</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was born on 19 June 1945 in Rangoon (now Yangon), British Burma. According to Peter Popham, she was born in a small village outside Rangoon called Hmway Saung.[29] Her father, firstnameplaceholder San, allied with the Japanese during World War II. firstnameplaceholder San founded the modern Burmese army and negotiated Burma's independence from the United Kingdom in 1947; he was assassinated by his rivals in the same year. She grew up with her mother, Khin Kyi, and two brothers, firstnameplaceholder San Lin and firstnameplaceholder San Oo, in Rangoon. firstnameplaceholder San Lin died at the age of eight when he drowned in an ornamental lake on the grounds of the house.[19] Her elder brother emigrated to San Diego, California, becoming a United States citizen.[19] After firstnameplaceholder San Lin's death, the family moved to a house by Inya Lake where firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder met people of various backgrounds, political views, and religions.[30] She was educated in Methodist English High School (now Basic Education High School No. 1 Dagon) for much of her childhood in Burma, where she was noted as having a talent for learning languages.[31] She speaks four languages: Burmese, English, French, and Japanese.[32] She is a Theravada Buddhist.Suu Kyi's mother, Khin Kyi, gained prominence as a political figure in the newly formed Burmese government. She was appointed Burmese ambassador to India and Nepal in 1960, and firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder followed her there. She studied in the Convent of Jesus and Mary School in New Delhi, and graduated from Lady Shri Ram College, a constituent college of the University of Delhi in New Delhi, with a degree in politics in 1964.[33][34] Suu Kyi continued her education at St Hugh's College, Oxford, obtaining a B.A. degree in Philosophy, Politics and Economics in 1967,[35] graduating with a third-class degree[36][37][38] and M.A. degree in politics in 1968. After graduating, she lived in New York City with family friend Ma Than E, who was once a popular Burmese pop singer.[39] She worked at the United Nations for three years, primarily on budget matters, writing daily to her future husband, Dr. Michael Aris.[40] On 1 January 1972, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder and Aris, a scholar of Tibetan culture and literature, living abroad in Bhutan, were married.[33][41] The following year, she gave birth to their first son, Alexander Aris, in London; their second son, Kim, was born in 1977. Between 1985 and 1987, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was working toward a Master of Philosophy degree in Burmese literature as a research student at School of Oriental and African Studies (SOAS), the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London.[42][43] She was elected as an Honorary Fellow of St Hugh's in 1990.[33] For two years, she was a Fellow at the Indian Institute of Advanced Studies (IIAS) in Shimla, India. She also worked for the government of the Union of Burma.In 1988, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder returned to Burma, at first to tend for her ailing mother but later to lead the pro-democracy movement. Aris' visit in Christmas 1995 turned out to be the last time that he and firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder met, as firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder remained in Burma and the Burmese dictatorship denied him any further entry visas.[33] Aris was diagnosed with prostate cancer in 1997 which was later found to be terminal. Despite appeals from prominent figures and organizations, including the United States, UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan and Pope John Paul II, the Burmese government would not grant Aris a visa, saying that they did not have the facilities to care for him, and instead urged firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder to leave the country to visit him. She was at that time temporarily free from house arrest but was unwilling to depart, fearing that she would be refused re-entry if she left, as she did not trust the military junta's assurance that she could return.[44]Aris died on his 53rd birthday on 27 March 1999. Since 1989, when his wife was first placed under house arrest, he had seen her only five times, the last of which was for Christmas in 1995. She was also separated from her children, who live in the United Kingdom, but starting in 2011, they have visited her in Burma.[45]On 2 May 2008, after Cyclone Nargis hit Burma, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's dilapidated lakeside bungalow lost its roof and electricity, while the cyclone also left entire villages in the Irrawaddy delta submerged.[46] Plans to renovate and repair the house were announced in August 2009.[47] Suu Kyi was released from house arrest on 13 November 2010.[48]
<h2>Political career</h2>
Coincidentally, when firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder returned to Burma in 1988, the long-time military leader of Burma and head of the ruling party, General Ne Win, stepped down. Mass demonstrations for democracy followed that event on 8 August 1988 (8–8–88, a day seen as auspicious), which were violently suppressed in what came to be known as the 8888 Uprising. On 26 August 1988, she addressed half a million people at a mass rally in front of the Shwedagon Pagoda in the capital, calling for a democratic government.[33] However, in September 1988, a new military junta took power.Influenced[49] by both Mahatma Gandhi's philosophy of non-violence[50][51] and more specifically by Buddhist concepts,[52] firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder entered politics to work for democratization, helped found the National League for Democracy on 27 September 1988,[53] but was put under house arrest on 20 July 1989. She was offered freedom if she left the country, but she refused. Despite her philosophy of non-violence, a group of ex-military commanders and senior politicians who joined NLD during the crisis believed that she was too confrontational and left NLD. However, she retained enormous popularity and support among NLD youths with whom she spent most of her time.[54]During her time under house arrest, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder devoted herself to Buddhist meditation practices and to studying Buddhist thought. This deeper interest in Buddhism is reflected in her writings as more emphasis is put on love and compassion.[55] There also emerged more discussion on the compatibility of democracy and Buddhism and the ability to gain freedom from an authoritarian government through Buddhism.[56]During the crisis, the previous democratically elected Prime Minister of Burma, U Nu, initiated to form an interim government and invited opposition leaders to join him. Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi had signaled his readiness to recognize the interim government. However, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder categorically rejected U Nu's plan by saying "the future of the opposition would be decided by masses of the people". Ex-Brigadier General firstnameplaceholder Gyi, another influential politician at the time of the 8888 crisis and the first chairman in the history of the NLD, followed the suit and rejected the plan after firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's refusal.[57] firstnameplaceholder Gyi later accused several NLD members of being communists and resigned from the party.[54]In 1990, the military junta called a general election, in which the National League for Democracy (NLD) received 59% of the votes, guaranteeing NLD 80% of the parliament seats. Some[who?] claim that firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder would have assumed the office of Prime Minister.[58] Instead, the results were nullified and the military refused to hand over power, resulting in an international outcry. firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was placed under house arrest at her home on University Avenue (16°49′32″N 96°9′1″E﻿ / ﻿16.82556°N 96.15028°E﻿ / 16.82556; 96.15028) in Rangoon, during which time she was awarded the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought in 1990, and the Nobel Peace Prize one year later. Her sons Alexander and Kim accepted the Nobel Peace Prize on her behalf. firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder used the Nobel Peace Prize's US$1.3 million prize money to establish a health and education trust for the Burmese people.[59] Around this time, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder chose non-violence as an expedient political tactic, stating in 2007, "I do not hold to non-violence for moral reasons, but for political and practical reasons."[60]The decision of the Nobel Committee mentions:[61]In 1995 firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder delivered the keynote address at the Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing.[62]On 9 November 1996, the motorcade that firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was traveling in with other National League for Democracy leaders Tin Oo and Kyi Maung, was attacked in Yangon. About 200 men swooped down on the motorcade, wielding metal chains, metal batons, stones and other weapons. The car that firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was in had its rear window smashed, and the car with Tin Oo and Kyi Maung had its rear window and two backdoor windows shattered. It is believed the offenders were members of the Union Solidarity and Development Association (USDA) who were allegedly paid 500 kyats (@ USD $0.50) each to participate. The NLD lodged an official complaint with the police, and according to reports the government launched an investigation, but no action was taken. (Amnesty International 120297)[63]firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was placed under house arrest for a total of 15 years over a 21-year period, on numerous occasions, since she began her political career,[64] during which time she was prevented from meeting her party supporters and international visitors. In an interview, she said that while under house arrest she spent her time reading philosophy, politics and biographies that her husband had sent her.[65] She also passed the time playing the piano and was occasionally allowed visits from foreign diplomats as well as from her personal physician.[66]Although under house arrest, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was granted permission to leave Burma under the condition that she never return, which she refused: "As a mother, the greater sacrifice was giving up my sons, but I was always aware of the fact that others had given up more than me. I never forget that my colleagues who are in prison suffer not only physically, but mentally for their families who have no security outside- in the larger prison of Burma under authoritarian rule."[67]The media were also prevented from visiting firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, as occurred in 1998 when journalist Maurizio Giuliano, after photographing her, was stopped by customs officials who then confiscated all his films, tapes and some notes.[68] In contrast, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder did have visits from government representatives, such as during her autumn 1994 house arrest when she met the leader of Burma, General Than Shwe and General Khin Nyunt on 20 September in the first meeting since she had been placed in detention.[33] On several occasions during her house arrest, she had periods of poor health and as a result was hospitalized.[69]The Burmese government detained and kept firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder imprisoned because it viewed her as someone "likely to undermine the community peace and stability" of the country, and used both Article 10(a) and 10(b) of the 1975 State Protection Act (granting the government the power to imprison people for up to five years without a trial),[70] and Section 22 of the "Law to Safeguard the State Against the Dangers of Those Desiring to Cause Subversive Acts" as legal tools against her.[71] She continuously appealed her detention,[72] and many nations and figures continued to call for her release and that of 2,100 other political prisoners in the country.[73][74] On 12 November 2010, days after the junta-backed Union Solidarity and Development Party (USDP) won elections conducted after a gap of 20 years, the junta finally agreed to sign orders allowing firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's release,[75] and Suu Kyi's house arrest term came to an end on 13 November 2010.The United Nations (UN) has attempted to facilitate dialogue between the junta and firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder.[33] On 6 May 2002, following secret confidence-building negotiations led by the UN, the government released her; a government spokesman said that she was free to move "because we are confident that we can trust each other". firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder proclaimed "a new dawn for the country". However, on 30 May 2003 in an incident similar to the 1996 attack on her, a government-sponsored mob attacked her caravan in the northern village of Depayin, murdering and wounding many of her supporters.[76] firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder fled the scene with the help of her driver, Kyaw Soe Lin, but was arrested upon reaching Ye-U. The government imprisoned her at Insein Prison in Rangoon. After she underwent a hysterectomy in September 2003,[77] the government again placed her under house arrest in Rangoon.The results from the UN facilitation have been mixed; Razali Ismail, UN special envoy to Burma, met with firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder. Ismail resigned from his post the following year, partly because he was denied re-entry to Burma on several occasions.[78] Several years later in 2006, Ibrahim Gambari, UN Undersecretary-General (USG) of Department of Political Affairs, met with firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, the first visit by a foreign official since 2004.[79] He also met with Suu Kyi later the same year.[80] On 2 October 2007 Gambari returned to talk to her again after seeing Than Shwe and other members of the senior leadership in Naypyidaw.[81] State television broadcast firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder with Gambari, stating that they had met twice. This was firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's first appearance in state media in the four years since her current detention began.[82]The United Nations Working Group for Arbitrary Detention published an Opinion that firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's deprivation of liberty was arbitrary and in contravention of Article 9 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1948, and requested that the authorities in Burma set her free, but the authorities ignored the request at that time.[83] The U.N. report said that according to the Burmese Government's reply, "Daw firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder has not been arrested, but has only been taken into protective custody, for her own safety", and while "it could have instituted legal action against her under the country's domestic legislation  ... it has preferred to adopt a magnanimous attitude, and is providing her with protection in her own interests".[83]Such claims were rejected by Brig-General Khin Yi, Chief of Myanmar Police Force (MPF). On 18 January 2007, the state-run paper New Light of Myanmar accused Suu Kyi of tax evasion for spending her Nobel Prize money outside the country. The accusation followed the defeat of a US-sponsored United Nations Security Council resolution condemning Burma as a threat to international security; the resolution was defeated because of strong opposition from China, which has strong ties with the military junta (China later voted against the resolution, along with Russia and South Africa).[84]In November 2007, it was reported that firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder would meet her political allies National League for Democracy along with a government minister. The ruling junta made the official announcement on state TV and radio just hours after UN special envoy Ibrahim Gambari ended his second visit to Burma. The NLD confirmed that it had received the invitation to hold talks with Suu Kyi.[85] However, the process delivered few concrete results.On 3 July 2009, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon went to Burma to pressure the junta into releasing firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder and to institute democratic reform. However, on departing from Burma, Ban Ki-moon said he was "disappointed" with the visit after junta leader Than Shwe refused permission for him to visit firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, citing her ongoing trial. Ban said he was "deeply disappointed that they have missed a very important opportunity".[86]Protests led by Buddhist monks began on 19 August 2007 following steep fuel price increases, and continued each day, despite the threat of a crackdown by the military.[92]On 22 September 2007, although still under house arrest, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder made a brief public appearance at the gate of her residence in Yangon to accept the blessings of Buddhist monks who were marching in support of human rights.[93] It was reported that she had been moved the following day to Insein Prison (where she had been detained in 2003),[94][95][96][97] but meetings with UN envoy Ibrahim Gambari near her Rangoon home on 30 September and 2 October established that she remained under house arrest.[98][99]On 3 May 2009, an American man, identified as John Yettaw, swam across Inya Lake to her house uninvited and was arrested when he made his return trip three days later.[100] He had attempted to make a similar trip two years earlier, but for unknown reasons was turned away.[101] He later claimed at trial that he was motivated by a divine vision requiring him to notify her of an impending terrorist assassination attempt.[102] On 13 May, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was arrested for violating the terms of her house arrest because the swimmer, who pleaded exhaustion, was allowed to stay in her house for two days before he attempted the swim back. firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was later taken to Insein Prison, where she could have faced up to five years confinement for the intrusion.[103] The trial of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder and her two maids began on 18 May and a small number of protesters gathered outside.[104][105] Diplomats and journalists were barred from attending the trial; however, on one occasion, several diplomats from Russia, Thailand and Singapore and journalists were allowed to meet firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder.[106] The prosecution had originally planned to call 22 witnesses.[107] It also accused John Yettaw of embarrassing the country.[108] During the ongoing defence case, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder said she was innocent. The defence was allowed to call only one witness (out of four), while the prosecution was permitted to call 14 witnesses. The court rejected two character witnesses, NLD members Tin Oo and Win Tin, and permitted the defence to call only a legal expert.[109] According to one unconfirmed report, the junta was planning to, once again, place her in detention, this time in a military base outside the city.[110] In a separate trial, Yettaw said he swam to Suu Kyi's house to warn her that her life was "in danger".[111] The national police chief later confirmed that Yettaw was the "main culprit" in the case filed against firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder.[112] According to aides, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder spent her 64th birthday in jail sharing biryani rice and chocolate cake with her guards.[113]Her arrest and subsequent trial received worldwide condemnation by the UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon, the United Nations Security Council,[114] Western governments,[115] South Africa,[116] Japan[117] and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, of which Burma is a member.[118] The Burmese government strongly condemned the statement, as it created an "unsound tradition"[119] and criticised Thailand for meddling in its internal affairs.[120] The Burmese Foreign Minister Nyan Win was quoted in the state-run newspaper New Light of Myanmar as saying that the incident "was trumped up to intensify international pressure on Burma by internal and external anti-government elements who do not wish to see the positive changes in those countries' policies toward Burma".[108] Ban responded to an international campaign[121] by flying to Burma to negotiate, but Than Shwe rejected all of his requests.[122]On 11 August 2009, the trial concluded with Suu Kyi being sentenced to imprisonment for three years with hard labour. This sentence was commuted by the military rulers to further house arrest of 18 months.[123] On 14 August, US Senator Jim Webb visited Burma, visiting with junta leader Gen. Than Shwe and later with Suu Kyi. During the visit, Webb negotiated Yettaw's release and deportation from Burma.[124] Following the verdict of the trial, lawyers of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder said they would appeal against the 18-month sentence.[125] On 18 August, United States President Barack Obama asked the country's military leadership to set free all political prisoners, including firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder.[126] In her appeal, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder had argued that the conviction was unwarranted. However, her appeal against the August sentence was rejected by a Burmese court on 2 October 2009. Although the court accepted the argument that the 1974 constitution, under which she had been charged, was null and void, it also said the provisions of the 1975 security law, under which she has been kept under house arrest, remained in force. The verdict effectively meant that she would be unable to participate in the elections scheduled to take place in 2010 – the first in Burma in two decades. Her lawyer stated that her legal team would pursue a new appeal within 60 days.[127]firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder has received vocal support from Western nations in Europe,[128] Australia[128] and North[129] and South America, as well as India,[26] Israel,[130] Japan[131] the Philippines and South Korea.[132] In December 2007, the US House of Representatives voted unanimously 400–0 to award firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder the Congressional Gold Medal; the Senate concurred on 25 April 2008.[133] On 6 May 2008, President George W. Bush signed legislation awarding firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder the Congressional Gold Medal.[134] She is the first recipient in American history to receive the prize while imprisoned. More recently, there has been growing criticism of her detention by Burma's neighbours in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, particularly from Indonesia,[135] Thailand,[136] the Philippines[137][138] and Singapore.[139] At one point Malaysia warned Burma that it faced expulsion from ASEAN as a result of the detention of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder.[140] Other nations including South Africa,[141] Bangladesh[142] and the Maldives[143] also called for her release. The United Nations has urged the country to move towards inclusive national reconciliation, the restoration of democracy, and full respect for human rights.[144] In December 2008, the United Nations General Assembly passed a resolution condemning the human rights situation in Burma and calling for firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's release—80 countries voting for the resolution, 25 against and 45 abstentions.[145] Other nations, such as China and Russia, are less critical of the regime and prefer to cooperate only on economic matters.[146] Indonesia has urged China to push Burma for reforms.[147] However, Samak Sundaravej, former Prime Minister of Thailand, criticised the amount of support for firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, saying that "Europe uses firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder as a tool. If it's not related to firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, you can have deeper discussions with Myanmar."[148]Vietnam, however, did not support calls by other ASEAN member states for Myanmar to free firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, state media reported Friday, 14 August 2009.[149] The state-run Việt Nam News said Vietnam had no criticism of Myanmar's decision 11 August 2009 to place firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder under house arrest for the next 18 months, effectively barring her from elections scheduled for 2010. "It is our view that the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder trial is an internal affair of Myanmar", Vietnamese government spokesman Le Dung stated on the website of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. In contrast with other ASEAN member states, Dung said Vietnam has always supported Myanmar and hopes it will continue to implement the "roadmap to democracy" outlined by its government.[150]Nobel Peace Prize winners (Archbishop Desmond Tutu, the Dalai Lama, Shirin Ebadi, Adolfo Pérez Esquivel, Mairead Corrigan, Rigoberta Menchú, Prof. Elie Wiesel, US President Barack Obama, Betty Williams, Jody Williams and former US President Jimmy Carter) called for the rulers of Burma to release firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder to "create the necessary conditions for a genuine dialogue with Daw firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder and all concerned parties and ethnic groups to achieve an inclusive national reconciliation with the direct support of the United Nations".[33] Some of the money she received as part of the award helps fund London-based charity Prospect Burma, which provides higher education grants to Burmese students.[151]It was announced prior to the 2010 Burmese general election that firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder may be released "so she can organize her party",[152] However, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was not allowed to run.[153] On 1 October 2010 the government announced that she would be released on 13 November 2010.[154]US President Barack Obama personally advocated the release of all political prisoners, especially firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, during the US-ASEAN Summit of 2009.[155]The US Government hoped that successful general elections would be an optimistic indicator of the Burmese government's sincerity towards eventual democracy.[156] The Hatoyama government which spent 2.82 billion yen in 2008, has promised more Japanese foreign aid to encourage Burma to release firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder in time for the elections; and to continue moving towards democracy and the rule of law.[156][157]In a personal letter to firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, UK Prime Minister Gordon Brown cautioned the Burmese government of the potential consequences of rigging elections as "condemning Burma to more years of diplomatic isolation and economic stagnation".[158]Suu Kyi has met with many heads of state and opened a dialog with the Minister of Labor firstnameplaceholder Kyi (not to be confused with firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder).[159] She was allowed to meet with senior members of her NLD party at the State House,[160] however these meetings took place under close supervision.On the evening of 13 November 2010, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was released from house arrest.[161] This was the date her detention had been set to expire according to a court ruling in August 2009[162] and came six days after a widely criticised general election. She appeared in front of a crowd of her supporters, who rushed to her house in Rangoon when nearby barricades were removed by the security forces. firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder had been detained for 15 of the past 21 years.[163] The government newspaper New Light of Myanmar reported the release positively,[164] saying she had been granted a pardon after serving her sentence "in good conduct".[165] The New York Times suggested that the military government may have released Suu Kyi because it felt it was in a confident position to control her supporters after the election.[164] 
Her son Kim Aris was granted a visa in November 2010 to see his mother shortly after her release, for the first time in 10 years.[166] He visited again on 5 July 2011, to accompany her on a trip to Bagan, her first trip outside Yangon since 2003.[167] Her son visited again on 8 August 2011, to accompany her on a trip to Pegu, her second trip.[168]Discussions were held between Suu Kyi and the Burmese government during 2011, which led to a number of official gestures to meet her demands. In October, around a tenth of Burma's political prisoners were freed in an amnesty and trade unions were legalised.[169][170]In November 2011, following a meeting of its leaders, the NLD announced its intention to re-register as a political party to contend 48 by-elections necessitated by the promotion of parliamentarians to ministerial rank.[171] Following the decision, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder held a telephone conference with US President Barack Obama, in which it was agreed that Secretary of State Hillary Clinton would make a visit to Burma, a move received with caution by Burma's ally China.[172] On 1 December 2011, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder met with Hillary Clinton at the residence of the top-ranking US diplomat in Yangon.[173]On 21 December 2011, Thai Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra met firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder in Yangoon, marking firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's "first-ever meeting with the leader of a foreign country".[174]On 5 January 2012, British Foreign Minister William Hague met firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder and his Burmese counterpart. This represented a significant visit for firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder and Burma. firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder studied in the UK and maintains many ties there, whilst Britain is Burma's largest bilateral donor.
During firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's visit to Europe, she visited the Swiss parliament, collected her 1991 Nobel Prize in Oslo and her honorary degree from the University of Oxford.[175]
[176][177]In December 2011, there was speculation that firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder would run in the 2012 national by-elections to fill vacant seats.[178] On 18 January 2012, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder formally registered to contest a Pyithu Hluttaw (lower house) seat in the Kawhmu Township constituency in special parliamentary elections to be held on 1 April 2012.[179][180] The seat was previously held by Soe Tint, who vacated it after being appointed Construction Deputy Minister, in the 2010 election.[181] She ran against Union Solidarity and Development Party candidate Soe Min, a retired army physician and native of Twante Township.[182]On 3 March 2012, at a large campaign rally in Mandalay, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder unexpectedly left after 15 minutes, because of exhaustion and airsickness.[183]In an official campaign speech broadcast on Burmese state television's MRTV on 14 March 2012, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder publicly campaigned for reform of the 2008 Constitution, removal of restrictive laws, more adequate protections for people's democratic rights, and establishment of an independent judiciary.[184] The speech was leaked online a day before it was broadcast.[185] A paragraph in the speech, focusing on the Tatmadaw's repression by means of law, was censored by authorities.[186]Suu Kyi has also called for international media to monitor the upcoming by-elections, while publicly pointing out irregularities in official voter lists, which include deceased individuals and exclude other eligible voters in the contested constituencies.[187][188] On 21 March 2012, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was quoted as saying "Fraud and rule violations are continuing and we can even say they are increasing."[189]When asked whether she would assume a ministerial post if given the opportunity, she said the following:[190]On 26 March 2012, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder suspended her nationwide campaign tour early, after a campaign rally in Myeik (Mergui), a coastal town in the south, citing health problems due to exhaustion and hot weather.[191]On 1 April 2012, the NLD announced that firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder had won the vote for a seat in Parliament.[192] A news broadcast on state-run MRTV, reading the announcements of the Union Election Commission, confirmed her victory, as well as her party's victory in 43 of the 45 contested seats, officially making firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder the Leader of the Opposition in the Pyidaungsu Hluttaw.[193]Although she and other MP-elects were expected to take office on 23 April when the Hluttaws resumed session, National League for Democracy MP-elects, including firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, said they might not take their oaths because of its wording; in its present form, parliamentarians must vow to "safeguard" the constitution.[194][195] In an address on Radio Free Asia, she said "We don't mean we will not attend the parliament, we mean we will attend only after taking the oath  ... Changing that wording in the oath is also in conformity with the Constitution. I don't expect there will be any difficulty in doing it."[196]On 2 May 2012, National League for Democracy MP-elects, including firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, took their oaths and took office, though the wording of the oath was not changed.[197] According to the Los Angeles Times, "Suu Kyi and her colleagues decided they could do more by joining as lawmakers than maintaining their boycott on principle."[197]
On 9 July 2012, she attended the Parliament for the first time as a lawmaker.[198]
[199]On 16 June 2012, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was finally able to deliver her Nobel acceptance speech (Nobel lecture) at Oslo's City Hall, two decades after being awarded the peace prize.[200][201] In September 2012, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder received in person the United States Congressional Gold Medal, which is the highest Congressional award. Although she was awarded this medal in 2008, at the time she was under house arrest, and was unable to receive the medal. firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was greeted with bipartisan support at Congress, as part of a coast-to-coast tour in the United States. In addition, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder met President Barack Obama at the White House. The experience was described by firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder as "one of the most moving days of my life."[202][203] In 2014, she was listed as the 61st most powerful woman in the world by Forbes.[204][205][206][207][208]On 6 July 2012, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder announced on the World Economic Forum's website that she wanted to run for the presidency in Myanmar's 2015 elections.[209] The current Constitution, which came into effect in 2008, bars her from the presidency because she is the widow and mother of foreigners – provisions that appeared to be written specifically to prevent her from being eligible.[210]The NLD won a sweeping victory in those elections, winning at least 255 seats in the House of Representatives and 135 seats in the House of Nationalities. In addition, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder won re-election to the House of Representatives. Under the 2008 constitution, the NLD needed to win at least a two-thirds majority in both houses to ensure that its candidate would become president. Before the elections, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder announced that even though she is constitutionally barred from the presidency, she would hold the real power in any NLD-led government.[211] On 30 March 2016 she became Minister for the President's Office, for Foreign Affairs, for Education and for Electric Power and Energy in President Htin Kyaw's government; later she relinquished the latter two ministries and President Htin Kyaw appointed her State Counsellor, a position akin to a Prime Minister created especially for her.[212][213][214][215][216][217] The position of State Counsellor was approved by the House of Nationalities on 1 April 2016 and the House of Representatives on 5 April 2016. The next day, her role as State Counsellor was established.As soon as she became foreign minister, she invited Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi, Canadian Foreign Minister Stephane Dion and Italian Foreign Minister Paolo Gentiloni in April and Japanese Foreign Minister Fumio Kishida in May and discussed to have good diplomatic relationships with these countries.[218][219][220]Initially, upon accepting the State Counsellor position, she granted amnesty to the students who were arrested for opposing the National Education Bill, and announced the creation of the commission on Rakhine state, which had a long record of persecution of the Muslim Rohingya minority. However, soon firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's government did not manage with the ethnic conflicts in Shan and Kachin states, where thousands of refugees fled to China, and by 2017 the persecution of the Rohingya by the government forces escalated to the point that it is not uncommonly called a genocide. firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, when interviewed, has denied the allegations of ethnic cleansing.[221][222] She has also refused to grant citizenship to the Rohingya, instead taking steps to issue ID cards for residency but no guarantees of citizenship.[223]Her tenure as State Counsellor of Myanmar has drawn international criticism for her failure to address her country's economic and ethnic problems, particularly the plight of the Rohingya following the 25 August 2017 ARSA attacks (described as "certainly one of the biggest refugee crises and cases of ethnic cleansing since the Second World War"), for the weakening of freedom of the press and for her style of leadership, described as imperious and "distracted and out of touch".[224][225]During the COVID-19 pandemic in Myanmar, Suu Kyi chaired a National Central Committee responsible for coordinating the country's pandemic response.[226]In 2017, critics called for firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's Nobel prize to be revoked, citing her silence over the persecution of Rohingya people in Myanmar.[227][228]
Some activists criticised firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder for her silence on the 2012 Rakhine State riots (later repeated during the 2015 Rohingya refugee crisis), and her indifference to the plight of the Rohingya, Myanmar's persecuted Muslim minority.[229][230] In 2012, she told reporters she did not know if the Rohingya could be regarded as Burmese citizens.[231] In a 2013 interview with the BBC's Mishal Husain, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder did not condemn violence against the Rohingya and denied that Muslims in Myanmar have been subject to ethnic cleansing, insisting that the tensions were due to a "climate of fear" caused by "a worldwide perception that global Muslim power is 'very great'". She did condemn "hate of any kind" in the interview.[232] According to Peter Popham, in the aftermath of the interview, she expressed anger at being interviewed by a Muslim.[233] Husain had challenged Suu Kyi that almost all of the impact of violence was against the Rohingya, in response to firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's claim that violence was happening on both sides, and Peter Popham described her position on the issue as one of purposeful ambiguity for political gain.[234][page needed]However, she said that she wanted to work towards reconciliation and she cannot take sides as violence has been committed by both sides.[235] According to The Economist, her "halo has even slipped among foreign human-rights lobbyists, disappointed at her failure to make a clear stand on behalf of the Rohingya minority". However, she has spoken out "against a ban on Rohingya families near the Bangladeshi border having more than two children".[236]In a 2015 BBC News article, reporter Jonah Fisher suggested that firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's silence over the Rohingya issue is due to a need to obtain support from the majority Bamar ethnicity as she is in "the middle of a general election campaign".[237] In May 2015, the Dalai Lama publicly called upon her to do more to help the Rohingya in Myanmar, claiming that he had previously urged her to address the plight of the Rohingya in private during two separate meetings and that she had resisted his urging.[238] In May 2016, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder asked the newly appointed United States Ambassador to Myanmar, Scot Marciel, not to refer to the Rohingya by that name as they "are not recognized as among the 135 official ethnic groups" in Myanmar.[239] This followed Bamar protests at Marciel's use of the word "Rohingya".[240]In 2016, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was accused of failing to protect Myanmar's Rohingya Muslims during the 2016–17 persecution.[241] State crime experts from Queen Mary University of London warned that firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder is "legitimising genocide" in Myanmar.[242] Despite continued persecution of the Rohingya well into 2017, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was "not even admitting, let alone trying to stop, the army's well-documented campaign of rape, murder and destruction against Rohingya villages".[243] On 4 September 2017, Yanghee Lee, the UN's special rapporteur on human rights in Myanmar, criticised Suu Kyi's response to the "really grave" situation in Rakhine, saying: "The de facto leader needs to step in – that is what we would expect from any government, to protect everybody within their own jurisdiction."[244] The BBC reported that "Her comments came as the number of Rohingya fleeing to Bangladesh reached 87,000, according to UN estimates", adding that "her sentiments were echoed by Nobel Peace laureate Malala Yousafzai, who said she was waiting to hear from Ms Suu Kyi – who has not commented on the crisis since it erupted".[244] The next day George Monbiot, writing in The Guardian, called on readers to sign a change.org petition to have the Nobel peace prize revoked, criticising her silence on the matter and asserting "whether out of prejudice or out of fear, she denies to others the freedoms she rightly claimed for herself. Her regime excludes – and in some cases seeks to silence – the very activists who helped to ensure her own rights were recognised."[245] The Nobel Foundation replied that there existed no provision for revoking a Nobel Prize.[246] Archbishop Desmond Tutu, a fellow peace prize holder, also criticised Suu Kyi's silence: in an open letter published on social media, he said: "If the political price of your ascension to the highest office in Myanmar is your silence, the price is surely too steep  ... It is incongruous for a symbol of righteousness to lead such a country."[247] On 13 September it was revealed that firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder would not be attending a UN General Assembly debate being held the following week to discuss the humanitarian crisis, with a Myanmar government spokesman stating "perhaps she has more pressing matters to deal with".[248]In October 2017, Oxford City Council announced that, following a unanimous cross-party vote,[249] the honour of Freedom of the City, granted in 1997 in recognition of her "long struggle for democracy", was to be withdrawn following evidence emerging from the United Nations which meant that she was "no longer worthy of the honour".[250] A few days later, Munsur Ali, a councillor for City of London Corporation, tabled a motion to rescind the Freedom of the City of London: the motion was supported by Catherine McGuinness, chair of the corporation's policy and resources committee, who expressed "distress  ... at the situation in Burma and the atrocities committed by the Burmese military".[249] On 13 November 2017, Bob Geldof returned his Freedom of the City of Dublin award in protest over firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder also holding the accolade, stating that he does not "wish to be associated in any way with an individual currently engaged in the mass ethnic cleansing of the Rohingya people of north-west Burma".  Calling firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder a "handmaiden to genocide",[251] Geldof added that he would take pride in his award being restored if it is first stripped from her.[252] The Dublin City Council voted 59–2 (with one abstention) to revoke firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's Freedom of the City award over Myanmar's treatment of the Rohingya people in December 2017, though Lord Mayor of Dublin Mícheál Mac Donncha denied the decision was influenced by protests by Geldof and members of U2.[253][254]  At the same meeting, the Councillors voted 37–7 (with 5 abstentions) to remove Geldof's name from the Roll of Honorary Freemen.[253][255]In March 2018, the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum revoked Suu Kyi's Elie Wiesel Award, awarded in 2012, citing her failure "to condemn and stop the military's brutal campaign" against Rohingya Muslims.[256][257][258]In May 2018, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was considered complicit in the crimes against Rohingyas in a report by Britain's International Development Committee.[259]In August 2018, it was revealed that firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder would be stripped of her Freedom of Edinburgh award over her refusal to speak out against the crimes committed against the Rohingya. She had received the award in 2005 for promoting peace and democracy in Burma.[260] This will be only the second time that anyone has ever been stripped of the award,[261][262] after Charles Stewart Parnell lost it in 1890 due to a salacious affair.[262] Also in August, a UN report, while describing the violence as genocide, added that firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder did as little as possible to prevent it.[263]In early October 2018, both the Canadian Senate and its House of Commons voted unanimously to strip firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder of her honorary citizenship. This decision was caused by the Government of Canada's determination that the treatment of the Rohingya by Myanmar's government amounts to genocide.[264]On 11 November 2018, Amnesty International announced it was revoking her Ambassador of Conscience award.[265]
In December 2019, Suu Kyi appeared in the International Court of Justice at The Hague where she defended the Burmese military against allegations of genocide against the Rohingya.[17] In a speech of over 3,000 words, Suu Kyi did not use the term "Rohingya" in describing the ethnic group.[266]   She stated that the allegations of genocide were "incomplete and misleading",[17] claiming that the situation was actually a Burmese military response to attacks by the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army.[266] She also questioned how there could be "genocidal intent" when the Burmese government had opened investigations and also encouraged Rohingya to return after being displaced.[267][268] However, experts have largely criticized the Burmese investigations as insincere, with the military declaring itself innocent and the government preventing a visit from investigators from the United Nations.[268] Many Rohingya have also not returned due to perceiving danger and a lack of rights in Myanmar.[267]In January 2020, the International Court of Justice decided that there was a "real and imminent risk of irreparable prejudice to the rights" of the Rohingya. The court also took the view that the Burmese government's efforts to remedy the situation "do not appear sufficient" enough to protect the Rohingya. Therefore, the court ordered the Burmese government to take "all measures within its power" to protect the Rohingya from genocidal actions. The court also instructed the Burmese government to preserve evidence and report back to the court at timely intervals about the situation.[269][270]In December 2017, two Reuters journalists, Wa Lone and Kyaw Soe Oo, were arrested while investigating the Inn Din massacre of Rohingyas alleged to have been carried out by Myanmar's security forces.[271][272] Suu Kyi publicly commented in June 2018 that the journalists "weren't arrested for covering the Rakhine issue", but because they had broken Myanmar's Official Secrets Act.[272][273] As the journalists were then on trial for violating the Official Secrets Act, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's presumption of their guilt were criticized by rights groups for potentially influencing the verdict.[272][274] American diplomat Bill Richardson said that he had privately discussed the arrest with Suu Kyi, and he alleged that firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder reacted angrily and labelled the journalists "traitors".[275] A police officer testified that he was ordered by superiors to use entrapment to frame and arrest the journalists; he was later jailed and his family evicted from their home in the police camp.[276] The judge found the journalists guilty in September 2018 and to be jailed for seven years.[272] firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder reacted to widespread international criticism of the verdict by stating: "I don't think anyone has bothered to read" the judgement as it had "nothing to do with freedom of expression at all", but the Official Secrets Act. She also challenged critics to "point out where there has been a miscarriage of justice", and told the two Reuters journalists that they could appeal their case to a higher court.[277]In September 2018, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights issued a report that since firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's party, the NLD, came to power, the arrests and criminal prosecutions of journalists in Myanmar by the government and military, under laws which are too vague and broad, have "made it impossible for journalists to do their job without fear or favour."[16]On 1 February 2021, Suu Kyi was arrested and deposed by the Myanmar military, along with other leaders of her National League for Democracy (NLD) party, after the Myanmar military declared the November 2020 general election results fraudulent.[278][18] A 1 February court order authorized her detainment for 15 days, stating that soldiers searching her Naypyidaw villa had uncovered imported communications equipment lacking proper paperwork. Suu Kyi was transferred to house arrest on the same evening, and on 3 February was formally charged with illegally importing ten or more walkie-talkies. She faces up to three years in prison for the charges. According to the New York Times, the charge "echoed previous accusations of esoteric legal crimes (and) arcane offenses" used by the military against critics and rivals.[279] As of 9 February, Suu Kyi continues to be held incommunicado.[280]US President Joe Biden raised the threat of new sanctions as a result of the Myanmar military coup.[281] In a statement, the UN Secretary-General António Guterres believes "These developments represent a serious blow to democratic reforms in Myanmar." Volkan Bozkir, President of the UN General Assembly, also voiced his concerns, having tweeted "Attempts to undermine democracy and rule of law are unacceptable", and called for the "immediate release" of the detained NLD party leaders.[282]On 1 April 2021, Suu Kyi was charged with the fifth offence, a British-era colonial law of violating the official secrets act. According to her lawyer, it is the most serious charge brought against her after the coup and could carry a sentence of up to 14-years in prison if convicted.[283] On 12 April 2021, Suu Kyi was hit with another charge, this time "under section 25 of the natural disaster management law". According to her lawyer, it is her sixth indictment. She appeared in court via video link and now faces five charges in the capital Naypyidaw and one in Yangon.[284]On 28 April 2021, the National Unity Government (NUG), in which Suu Kyi symbolically remains in her position, anticipated that there would be no talks with the junta until all political prisoners, including her, are set free. This move by her supporters come after an ASEAN-supported consensus with the junta leadership in the past days.[285] However, on 8 May 2021, the junta designated NUG as a terrorist organization and warned citizens not to cooperate, or give aid to the parallel government, stripping Suu Kyi of her symbolic position.[286][287][288] On 10 May 2021, her lawyer said she would appear in court in person for the first time since her arrest after the Supreme Court ruled that she could attend in person and meet her lawyers. She had been previously only allowed to do so remotely from her home.[289] On 21 May 2021, a military junta commission was formed to dissolve Suu Kyi's National League for Democracy (NLD) on grounds of election fraud in the November 2020 election.[290] On 22 May 2021, during his first interview since the coup, junta leader Min firstnameplaceholder Hlaing reported that she was in good health at her home and that she would appear in court in a matter of days.[291] On 23 May 2021, the European Union expressed support for Suu Kyi's party and condemned the commission aimed at dissolving the party, echoing the NLD's statement released earlier in the week.[292]On 24 May 2021, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder appeared in person in court for the first time since the coup to face the "incitement to sedition" charge against her.[293] During the 30-minute hearing, she said that she was not fully aware of what was going on outside as she had no access to full information from the outside and refused to respond on the matters. She was also quoted on the possibility of her party forced dissolution as "Our party grew out of the people so it will exist as long as people support it."[294] In her meeting with her lawyers, Suu Kyi also wished people "good health."[294]On 2 June 2021, it was reported that the military had moved her (as well as Win Myint) from their homes to an unknown location.[295]On 10 June 2021, Suu Kyi was charged with corruption, the most serious charge brought against her, which carries a maximum penalty of 15 years' imprisonment. Suu Kyi's lawyers say the charges are made to keep her out of the public eye.[296]On 14 June 2021, the trial against Suu Kyi began. Any conviction would prevent her from running for office again.[297] Suu Kyi's lawyers attempted to have prosecution testimony against her on the sedition charge disqualified but the motion was denied by the judge.[298]
<h2>Political beliefs</h2>
Asked what democratic models Myanmar could look to, she said: "We have many, many lessons to learn from various places, not just the Asian countries like South Korea, Taiwan, Mongolia, and Indonesia." She also cited "the eastern Europe and countries, which made the transition from communist autocracy to democracy in the 1980s and 1990s, and the Latin American countries, which made the transition from military governments. And we cannot of course forget South Africa, because although it wasn't a military regime, it was certainly an authoritarian regime." She added: "We wish to learn from everybody who has achieved a transition to democracy, and also ... our great strong point is that, because we are so far behind everybody else, we can also learn which mistakes we should avoid."[300]In a nod to the deep US political divide between Republicans led by Mitt Romney and the Democrats of Obama—then battling to win the 2012 Presidential election—she stressed, "Those of you who are familiar with American politics I'm sure understand the need for negotiated compromise."[300]
<h2>In popular culture</h2>
The life of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder and her husband Michael Aris is portrayed in Luc Besson's 2011 film The Lady, in which they are played by Michelle Yeoh and David Thewlis. Yeoh visited Suu Kyi in 2011 before the film's release in November.[325] In the John Boorman's 1995 film Beyond Rangoon, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was played by Adelle Lutz.[326]Since 2009,[327] Indian actress and Bharathanatyam dancer Rukmini Vijayakumar has been portraying firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder in a one-act play titled The Lady of Burma directed by Prakash Belawadi,[328][329] which also happens to be an eponymous play written by Richard Shannon.[330]Irish songwriters Damien Rice and Lisa Hannigan released in 2005 the single "Unplayed Piano", in support of the Free firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder 60th Birthday Campaign that was happening at the time.[331] U2's Bono wrote the song "Walk On" in tribute to firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, and publicized her plight during the U2 360° Tour, 2009–2011. Saxophonist Wayne Shorter composed a song titled "firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder". It appears on his albums 1+1 (with pianist Herbie Hancock) and Footprints Live!.[332]
<h2>Health problems</h2>
Suu Kyi underwent surgery for a gynecological condition in September 2003 at Asia Royal Hospital during her house arrest.[333] She also underwent minor foot surgery in December 2013 and eye surgery in April 2016.[334] Tin Myo Win, her doctor, said that she had no serious health problems but weighed only 48 kilograms (106 lb), had low blood pressure, and could become weak easily.[335]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Tum (Spanish: [riɣoˈβeɾta menˈtʃu]; born 9 January 1959)[1] is a K'iche' Guatemalan human rights activist, feminist,[2] and Nobel Peace Prize laureate. secondnameplaceholder has dedicated her life to publicizing the rights of Guatemala's Indigenous peoples during and after the Guatemalan Civil War (1960–1996), and to promoting Indigenous rights internationally.[3]She received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1992 and the Prince of Asturias Award in 1998, in addition to other prestigious awards. She is the subject of the testimonial biography I, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (1983) and the author of the autobiographical work, Crossing Borders (1998), among other works. secondnameplaceholder is a UNESCO Goodwill Ambassador. She ran for president of Guatemala in 2007 and 2011, having founded the country's first Indigenous political party, Winaq.[4]
<h2>Personal life</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was born to a poor Indigenous family of Q'iche' Maya descent in Laj Chimel, a rural area in the north-central Guatemalan province of El Quiché.[5] Her family was one of many Indigenous families who could not sustain themselves on the small pieces of land they were left with after the Spanish conquest of Guatemala.[6] secondnameplaceholder's mother began her career as a midwife at age sixteen, and continued to practice using traditional medicinal plants until she was murdered at age 43. Her father was a prominent activist for the rights of Indigenous farmers in Guatemala.[7] Both of her parents regularly attended Catholic church, and her mother remained significantly connected to her Maya spirituality and identity.[7] secondnameplaceholder considers herself to be the perfect mix of both her parents.[7] She believes in many teachings of the Catholic Church, but her mother's Maya influence also taught secondnameplaceholder the importance of living in harmony with nature and retaining her Maya culture.[7]In 1979-80 her brother, Patrocinio, and her mother, Juana Tum Kótoja, were kidnapped, brutally tortured and murdered by the Guatemalan army.[3] Her father, Vicente secondnameplaceholder Perez, died in the 1980 Burning of the Spanish Embassy, which occurred after urban guerrillas took hostages and were attacked by government security forces.[8] In January 2015, Pedro García Arredondo, a former police commander of the Guatemalan army, was convicted of attempted murder and crimes against humanity for his role in the embassy attack.[8][9]In 1984, secondnameplaceholder's other brother, Victor, was shot to death after he surrendered to the Guatemalan army, was threatened by soldiers, and tried to escape.[10]In 1995, secondnameplaceholder married Ángel Canil, a Guatemalan, in a Mayan ceremony. They had a Catholic wedding in January 1998; at that time they also buried their son Tz'unun ("hummingbird" in Mayan), who had died after being born prematurely in December.[11] They adopted a son, Mash Nahual J’a ("Spirit of Water").[12][13]She lives with her family in the municipality of San Pedro Jocopilas, Quiché Department, northwest of Guatemalạ City, in the heartland of the Kʼicheʼ people.
<h2>Guatemalan activism</h2>
From a young age, secondnameplaceholder was active alongside her father, advocating for the rights of Indigenous farmers through the Committee for Peasant Unity.[14][7] secondnameplaceholder often faced discrimination for wanting to join her male family members in the fight for justice, but she was inspired by her mother to continue making space for herself.[15] She believes that the roots of Indigenous oppression in Guatemala stem from issues of exploitation and colonial land ownership.[14] Her early activism focused on defending her people from colonial exploitation.[14]After leaving school, secondnameplaceholder worked as an activist campaigning against human rights violations committed by the Guatemalan armed forces during the country's civil war, which lasted from 1960 to 1996.[10] Many of the human rights violations that occurred during the war targeted Indigenous peoples.[16] Women were targets of physical and sexual violence at the hands of the military.[17]In 1981, secondnameplaceholder was exiled and escaped to Mexico where she found refuge in the home of a Catholic bishop in Chiapas.[18]  secondnameplaceholder continued to organize resistance to oppression in Guatemala and organize the struggle for Indigenous rights by co-founding the United Republic of Guatemalan Opposition.[19] Tens of thousands of people, mostly Mayan Indians, fled to Mexico from 1982 to 1984 at the height of Guatemala's 36-year civil war.[19]A year later, in 1982, she narrated a book about her life, titled Me llamo firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder y así me nació la conciencia (My Name is firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, and this is how my Awareness was Born), to Venezuelan author and anthropologist Elizabeth Burgos, which was translated into five other languages including English and French.[5] secondnameplaceholder narrated the book in Spanish, although she had only learned to speak it three years prior.[14] Spanish was a language that had been forced upon Indigenous peoples by colonizers, but secondnameplaceholder sought to master the language and turn it against her oppressors.[14] The book made her an international icon at the time of the ongoing conflict in Guatemala and brought attention to the suffering of Indigenous peoples under an oppressive government regime.[5][20]secondnameplaceholder served as the Presidential Goodwill Ambassador for the 1996 Peace Accords in Guatemala.[21] That same year she received the Peace Abbey Courage of Conscience Award in Boston.[22]After the Guatemalan Civil War ended, secondnameplaceholder campaigned to have Guatemalan political and military establishment members tried in Spanish courts.[23] In 1999, she filed a complaint before a court in Spain because prosecutions of civil-war era crimes in Guatemala was practically impossible.[23] These attempts stalled as the Spanish courts determined that the plaintiffs had not yet exhausted all possibilities of seeking justice through the legal system of Guatemala.[23] On 23 December 2006, Spain called for the extradition from Guatemala of seven former members of Guatemala's government, including Efraín Ríos Montt and Óscar Mejía, on charges of genocide and torture.[24] Spain's highest court ruled that cases of genocide committed abroad could be judged in Spain, even if no Spanish citizens were involved.[24] In addition to the deaths of Spanish citizens, the most serious charges include genocide against the Maya people of Guatemala.[24]On 12 February 2007, secondnameplaceholder announced that she would form an Indigenous political party called Encuentro por Guatemala and that she would stand in the 2007 presidential election.[25] She was the first Maya, Indigenous woman to ever run in a Guatemalan election.[26] Had she been elected, she would have become Latin America's fourth Indigenous president after Mexico's Benito Juárez, Peru's Alejandro Toledo and Bolivia's Evo Morales.[27] In the 2007 election, secondnameplaceholder was defeated in the first round, receiving three percent of the vote.[28]In 2009, secondnameplaceholder became involved in the newly founded party Winaq.[25] secondnameplaceholder was a candidate for the 2011 presidential election, but lost in the first round, winning three percent of the vote again.[29] Although secondnameplaceholder was not elected, Winaq succeeded in becoming the first Indigenous political party of Guatemala.[4]
<h2>International activism</h2>
In 1996, secondnameplaceholder was appointed as a UNESCO Goodwill Ambassador in recognition of her activism for the rights of Indigenous people.[30] In this capacity, she acted as a spokesperson for the first International Decade of the World's Indigenous Peoples (1995–2004), where she worked to improve international collaboration on issues such as environment, education, health care, and human rights for Indigenous peoples.[31][32] In 2015, secondnameplaceholder met with the general director of UNESCO, Irina Bokova, in order to solidify relations between Guatemala and the organization.[33]Since 2003, secondnameplaceholder has become involved in the Indigenous pharmaceutical industry as president of "Salud para Todos" ("Health for All") and the company "Farmacias Similares," with the goal of offering low-cost generic medicines.[21][34] As president of this organization, secondnameplaceholder has received pushback from large pharmaceutical companies due to her desire to shorten the patent life of certain AIDS and cancer drugs to increase their availability and affordability.[34]In 2006, secondnameplaceholder was one of the founders of the Nobel Women's Initiative along with sister Nobel Peace Laureates Jody Williams, Shirin Ebadi, Wangari Maathai, Betty Williams and Mairead Corrigan Maguire.[35] These six women, representing North America, South America, Europe, the Middle East, and Africa, decided to bring together their experiences in a united effort for peace, justice and equality.[35] It is the goal of the Nobel Women's Initiative to help strengthen women's rights around the world.[35]secondnameplaceholder is a member of PeaceJam, an organization whose mission is to use Nobel Peace Laureates as mentors and models for young people and provide a way for these Laureates to share their knowledge, passions, and experience.[36][37] She travels around the world speaking to youth through PeaceJam conferences.[36] She has also been a member of the Foundation Chirac's honor committee since the foundation was launched in 2008 by former French president Jacques Chirac in order to promote world peace.[38]secondnameplaceholder has continued her activism in recent years, according to the Prensa Latina, by continuing to raise awareness for issues including political and economic inequality and climate change.[39] She continues to be a spokesperson for human rights, including the current violations occurring in Venezuela.[40]
<h2>Legacy</h2>
More than a decade after the publication of I, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, anthropologist David Stoll investigated secondnameplaceholder's story and claimed that secondnameplaceholder changed some elements about her life, family, and village to meet the publicity needs of the guerrilla movement.[58] The controversy caused by Stoll's book received widespread coverage in the US press of the time.[59] The New York Times highlighted a few claims in her book contradicted by other sources:[60]Many authors have defended secondnameplaceholder, and attributed the controversy to different interpretations of the testimonio genre.[61][62][63][64] secondnameplaceholder herself states,  "I'd like to stress that it's not only my life, it's also the testimony of my people."[14] Despite accusations of factual and historical discrepancies, secondnameplaceholder's testimony remains relevant for the ways in which it depicts the life of an Indigenous Guatemalan during the civil war.[63]The Nobel Committee dismissed calls to revoke secondnameplaceholder's Nobel Prize, in spite of Stoll's allegations regarding secondnameplaceholder.[65] Geir Lundestad, the secretary of the committee, stated that secondnameplaceholder's prize was awarded because of her advocacy and social justice work, not because of her testimony, and that she had committed no observable wrongdoing.[5][41]According to Mark Horowitz, William Yaworsky, and Kenneth Kickham, the controversy about Stoll's account of Menchu is one of the three most divisive episodes in recent American anthropological history, along with controversies about the truthfulness of Margaret Mead's Coming of Age in Samoa and Napoleon Chagnon's representation of violence among the Yanomami.[66]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder Rolihlahla secondnameplaceholder (/mænˈdɛlə/;[1] Xhosa: [xolíɬaɬa mandɛ̂ːla]; 18 July 1918 – 5 December 2013) was a South African anti-apartheid revolutionary, political leader and philanthropist who served as President of South Africa from 1994 to 1999. He was the country's first Black head of state and the first elected in a fully representative democratic election. His government focused on dismantling the legacy of apartheid by tackling institutionalised racism and fostering racial reconciliation. Ideologically an African nationalist and socialist, he served as the president of the African National Congress (ANC) party from 1991 to 1997.A Xhosa speaker, secondnameplaceholder was born to the Thembu royal family in Mvezo, Union of South Africa. He studied law at the University of Fort Hare and the University of Witwatersrand before working as a lawyer in Johannesburg. There he became involved in anti-colonial and African nationalist politics, joining the ANC in 1943 and co-founding its Youth League in 1944. After the National Party's white-only government established apartheid, a system of racial segregation that privileged whites, he and the ANC committed themselves to its overthrow. secondnameplaceholder was appointed president of the ANC's Transvaal branch, rising to prominence for his involvement in the 1952 Defiance Campaign and the 1955 Congress of the People. He was repeatedly arrested for seditious activities and was unsuccessfully prosecuted in the 1956 Treason Trial. Influenced by Marxism, he secretly joined the banned South African Communist Party (SACP). Although initially committed to non-violent protest, in association with the SACP he co-founded the militant Umkhonto we Sizwe in 1961 and led a sabotage campaign against the government. He was arrested and imprisoned in 1962, and subsequently sentenced to life imprisonment for conspiring to overthrow the state following the Rivonia Trial.secondnameplaceholder served 27 years in prison, split between Robben Island, Pollsmoor Prison and Victor Verster Prison. Amid growing domestic and international pressure and fears of racial civil war, President F. W. de Klerk released him in 1990. secondnameplaceholder and de Klerk led efforts to negotiate an end to apartheid, which resulted in the 1994 multiracial general election in which secondnameplaceholder led the ANC to victory and became president. Leading a broad coalition government which promulgated a new constitution, secondnameplaceholder emphasised reconciliation between the country's racial groups and created the Truth and Reconciliation Commission to investigate past human rights abuses. Economically, secondnameplaceholder's administration retained its predecessor's liberal framework despite his own socialist beliefs, also introducing measures to encourage land reform, combat poverty and expand healthcare services. Internationally, he acted as mediator in the Pan Am Flight 103 bombing trial and served as secretary-general of the Non-Aligned Movement from 1998 to 1999. He declined a second presidential term and was succeeded by his deputy, Thabo Mbeki. secondnameplaceholder became an elder statesman and focused on combating poverty and HIV/AIDS through the charitable firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Foundation.secondnameplaceholder was a controversial figure for much of his life. Although critics on the right denounced him as a communist terrorist and those on the far left deemed him too eager to negotiate and reconcile with apartheid's supporters, he gained international acclaim for his activism. Widely regarded as an icon of democracy and social justice, he received more than 250 honours, including the Nobel Peace Prize. He is held in deep respect within South Africa, where he is often referred to by his Thembu clan name, Madiba, and described as the "Father of the Nation".
<h2>Early life</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born on 18 July 1918 in the village of Mvezo in Umtata, then part of South Africa's Cape Province.[2] Given the forename Rolihlahla,[3] a Xhosa term colloquially meaning "troublemaker",[4] in later years he became known by his clan name, Madiba.[5] His patrilineal great-grandfather, Ngubengcuka, was king of the Thembu people in the Transkeian Territories of South Africa's modern Eastern Cape province.[6] One of Ngubengcuka's sons, named secondnameplaceholder, was firstnameplaceholder's grandfather and the source of his surname.[7] Because secondnameplaceholder was the king's child by a wife of the Ixhiba clan, a so-called "Left-Hand House", the descendants of his cadet branch of the royal family were morganatic, ineligible to inherit the throne but recognised as hereditary royal councillors.[8]firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's father, Gadla Henry Mphakanyiswa secondnameplaceholder (1880–1928), was a local chief and councillor to the monarch; he was appointed to the position in 1915, after his predecessor was accused of corruption by a governing white magistrate.[9] In 1926, Gadla was also sacked for corruption, but firstnameplaceholder was told that his father had lost his job for standing up to the magistrate's unreasonable demands.[10] A devotee of the god Qamata,[11] Gadla was a polygamist with four wives, four sons and nine daughters, who lived in different villages. firstnameplaceholder's mother was Gadla's third wife, Nosekeni Fanny, daughter of Nkedama of the Right Hand House and a member of the amaMpemvu clan of the Xhosa.[12]secondnameplaceholder later stated that his early life was dominated by traditional Thembu custom and taboo.[14] He grew up with two sisters in his mother's kraal in the village of Qunu, where he tended herds as a cattle-boy and spent much time outside with other boys.[15] Both his parents were illiterate, but being a devout Christian, his mother sent him to a local Methodist school when he was about seven. Baptised a Methodist, secondnameplaceholder was given the English forename of "firstnameplaceholder" by his teacher.[16] When secondnameplaceholder was about nine, his father came to stay at Qunu, where he died of an undiagnosed ailment which secondnameplaceholder believed to be lung disease.[17] Feeling "cut adrift", he later said that he inherited his father's "proud rebelliousness" and "stubborn sense of fairness".[18]secondnameplaceholder's mother took him to the "Great Place" palace at Mqhekezweni, where he was entrusted to the guardianship of the Thembu regent, Chief Jongintaba Dalindyebo. Although he did not see his mother again for many years, secondnameplaceholder felt that Jongintaba and his wife Noengland treated him as their own child, raising him alongside their son, Justice, and daughter, Nomafu.[19] As secondnameplaceholder attended church services every Sunday with his guardians, Christianity became a significant part of his life.[20] He attended a Methodist mission school located next to the palace, where he studied English, Xhosa, history and geography.[21] He developed a love of African history, listening to the tales told by elderly visitors to the palace, and was influenced by the anti-imperialist rhetoric of a visiting chief, Joyi.[22] Nevertheless, at the time he considered the European colonizers not as oppressors but as benefactors who had brought education and other benefits to southern Africa.[23] Aged 16, he, Justice and several other boys travelled to Tyhalarha to undergo the ulwaluko circumcision ritual that symbolically marked their transition from boys to men; afterwards he was given the name Dalibunga.[24]Intending to gain skills needed to become a privy councillor for the Thembu royal house, in 1933 secondnameplaceholder began his secondary education at Clarkebury Methodist High School in Engcobo, a Western-style institution that was the largest school for Black Africans in Thembuland.[25] Made to socialise with other students on an equal basis, he claimed that he lost his "stuck up" attitude, becoming best friends with a girl for the first time; he began playing sports and developed his lifelong love of gardening.[26] He completed his Junior Certificate in two years,[27] and in 1937 moved to Healdtown, the Methodist college in Fort Beaufort attended by most Thembu royalty, including Justice.[28] The headmaster emphasised the superiority of European culture and government, but secondnameplaceholder became increasingly interested in native African culture, making his first non-Xhosa friend, a speaker of Sotho, and coming under the influence of one of his favourite teachers, a Xhosa who broke taboo by marrying a Sotho.[29] secondnameplaceholder spent much of his spare time at Healdtown as a long-distance runner and boxer, and in his second year he became a prefect.[30]With Jongintaba's backing, in 1939 secondnameplaceholder began work on a BA degree at the University of Fort Hare, an elite Black institution in Alice, Eastern Cape, with around 150 students. There he studied English, anthropology, politics, "native administration", and Roman Dutch law in his first year, desiring to become an interpreter or clerk in the Native Affairs Department.[31] secondnameplaceholder stayed in the Wesley House dormitory, befriending his own kinsman, K. D. Matanzima, as well as Oliver Tambo, who became a close friend and comrade for decades to come.[32] He took up ballroom dancing,[33] performed in a drama society play about Abraham Lincoln,[34] and gave Bible classes in the local community as part of the Student Christian Association.[35] Although he had friends who held connections to the African National Congress (ANC) who wanted South Africa to be independent of the British Empire, secondnameplaceholder avoided any involvement with the nascent movement,[36] and became a vocal supporter of the British war effort when the Second World War broke out.[37] He helped establish a first-year students' house committee which challenged the dominance of the second-years,[38] and at the end of his first year became involved in a Students' Representative Council (SRC) boycott against the quality of food, for which he was suspended from the university; he never returned to complete his degree.[39]Returning to Mqhekezweni in December 1940, secondnameplaceholder found that Jongintaba had arranged marriages for him and Justice; dismayed, they fled to Johannesburg via Queenstown, arriving in April 1941.[40] secondnameplaceholder found work as a night watchman at Crown Mines, his "first sight of South African capitalism in action", but was fired when the induna (headman) discovered that he was a runaway.[41] He stayed with a cousin in George Goch Township, who introduced secondnameplaceholder to realtor and ANC activist Walter Sisulu. The latter secured secondnameplaceholder a job as an articled clerk at the law firm of Witkin, Sidelsky and Eidelman, a company run by Lazar Sidelsky, a liberal Jew sympathetic to the ANC's cause.[42] At the firm, secondnameplaceholder befriended Gaur Radebe—a Hlubi member of the ANC and Communist Party—and Nat Bregman, a Jewish communist who became his first white friend.[43] secondnameplaceholder attended Communist Party gatherings, where he was impressed that Europeans, Africans, Indians, and Coloureds mixed as equals. He later stated that he did not join the party because its atheism conflicted with his Christian faith, and because he saw the South African struggle as being racially based rather than as class warfare.[44] To continue his higher education, secondnameplaceholder signed up to a University of South Africa correspondence course, working on his bachelor's degree at night.[45]Earning a small wage, secondnameplaceholder rented a room in the house of the Xhoma family in the Alexandra township; despite being rife with poverty, crime and pollution, Alexandra always remained a special place for him.[46] Although embarrassed by his poverty, he briefly dated a Swati woman before unsuccessfully courting his landlord's daughter.[47] To save money and be closer to downtown Johannesburg, secondnameplaceholder moved into the compound of the Witwatersrand Native Labour Association, living among miners of various tribes; as the compound was visited by various chiefs, he once met the Queen Regent of Basutoland.[48] In late 1941, Jongintaba visited Johannesburg—there forgiving secondnameplaceholder for running away—before returning to Thembuland, where he died in the winter of 1942. secondnameplaceholder and Justice arrived a day late for the funeral.[49] After he passed his BA exams in early 1943, secondnameplaceholder returned to Johannesburg to follow a political path as a lawyer rather than become a privy councillor in Thembuland.[50] He later stated that he experienced no epiphany, but that he "simply found [himself] doing so, and could not do otherwise."[51]
<h2>Revolutionary activity</h2>
secondnameplaceholder began studying law at the University of the Witwatersrand, where he was the only black African student and faced racism. There, he befriended liberal and communist European, Jewish, and Indian students, among them Joe Slovo and Ruth First.[52] Becoming increasingly politicised, in August 1943 secondnameplaceholder marched in support of a successful bus boycott to reverse fare rises.[53] Joining the ANC, he was increasingly influenced by Sisulu, spending time with other activists at Sisulu's Orlando house, including his old friend Oliver Tambo.[54] In 1943, secondnameplaceholder met Anton Lembede, an ANC member affiliated with the "Africanist" branch of African nationalism, which was virulently opposed to a racially united front against colonialism and imperialism or to an alliance with the communists.[55] Despite his friendships with white people, people of colour, and communists, secondnameplaceholder embraced Lembede's views, believing that Black Africans should be entirely independent in their struggle for political self-determination.[56] Deciding on the need for a youth wing to mass-mobilise Africans in opposition to their subjugation, secondnameplaceholder was among a delegation that approached ANC President Alfred Bitini Xuma on the subject at his home in Sophiatown; the African National Congress Youth League (ANCYL) was founded on Easter Sunday 1944 in the Bantu Men's Social Centre, with Lembede as president and secondnameplaceholder as a member of its executive committee.[57]At Sisulu's house, secondnameplaceholder met Evelyn Mase, a trainee nurse and ANC activist from Engcobo, Transkei. Entering a relationship and marrying in October 1944, they initially lived with her relatives until moving into a rented house in the township of Orlando in early 1946.[59] Their first child, Madiba "Thembi" Thembekile, was born in February 1945; a daughter, Makaziwe, was born in 1947 but died of meningitis nine months later.[60] secondnameplaceholder enjoyed home life, welcoming his mother and his sister, Leabie, to stay with him.[61] In early 1947, his three years of articles ended at Witkin, Sidelsky and Eidelman, and he decided to become a full-time student, subsisting on loans from the Bantu Welfare Trust.[62]In July 1947, secondnameplaceholder rushed Lembede, who was ill, to hospital, where he died; he was succeeded as ANCYL president by the more moderate Peter Mda, who agreed to co-operate with communists, white people, and people of colour, appointing secondnameplaceholder ANCYL secretary.[63] secondnameplaceholder disagreed with Mda's approach, and in December 1947 supported an unsuccessful measure to expel communists from the ANCYL, considering their ideology un-African.[64] In 1947, secondnameplaceholder was elected to the executive committee of the ANC's Transvaal Province branch, serving under regional president C. S. Ramohanoe. When Ramohanoe acted against the wishes of the committee by co-operating with Indians and communists, secondnameplaceholder was one of those who forced his resignation.[65]In the South African general election in 1948, in which only whites were permitted to vote, the Afrikaner-dominated Herenigde Nasionale Party under Daniel François Malan took power, soon uniting with the Afrikaner Party to form the National Party. Openly racialist, the party codified and expanded racial segregation with new apartheid legislation.[66] Gaining increasing influence in the ANC, secondnameplaceholder and his party cadre allies began advocating direct action against apartheid, such as boycotts and strikes, influenced by the tactics already employed by South Africa's Indian community. Xuma did not support these measures and was removed from the presidency in a vote of no confidence, replaced by James Moroka and a more militant executive committee containing Sisulu, Mda, Tambo, and Godfrey Pitje.[67] secondnameplaceholder later related that he and his colleagues had "guided the ANC to a more radical and revolutionary path."[68] Having devoted his time to politics, secondnameplaceholder failed his final year at Witwatersrand three times; he was ultimately denied his degree in December 1949.[69]secondnameplaceholder took Xuma's place on the ANC national executive in March 1950,[71] and that same year was elected national president of the ANCYL.[72] In March, the Defend Free Speech Convention was held in Johannesburg, bringing together African, Indian, and communist activists to call a May Day general strike in protest against apartheid and white minority rule. secondnameplaceholder opposed the strike because it was multi-racial and not ANC-led, but a majority of Black workers took part, resulting in increased police repression and the introduction of the Suppression of Communism Act, 1950, affecting the actions of all protest groups.[73] At the ANC national conference of December 1951, he continued arguing against a racially united front, but was outvoted.[74]Thereafter, secondnameplaceholder rejected Lembede's Africanism and embraced the idea of a multi-racial front against apartheid.[75] Influenced by friends like Moses Kotane and by the Soviet Union's support for wars of national liberation, his mistrust of communism broke down and he began reading literature by Karl Marx, Vladimir Lenin, and Mao Zedong, eventually embracing the Marxist philosophy of dialectical materialism.[76] Commenting on communism, he later stated that he "found [himself] strongly drawn to the idea of a classless society which, to [his] mind, was similar to traditional African culture where life was shared and communal."[77] In April 1952, secondnameplaceholder began work at the H.M. Basner law firm, which was owned by a communist,[78] although his increasing commitment to work and activism meant he spent less time with his family.[79]In 1952, the ANC began preparation for a joint Defiance Campaign against apartheid with Indian and communist groups, founding a National Voluntary Board to recruit volunteers. The campaign was designed to follow the path of nonviolent resistance influenced by Mahatma Gandhi; some supported this for ethical reasons, but secondnameplaceholder instead considered it pragmatic.[80] At a Durban rally on 22 June, secondnameplaceholder addressed an assembled crowd of 10,000 people, initiating the campaign protests for which he was arrested and briefly interned in Marshall Square prison.[81] These events established secondnameplaceholder as one of the best-known Black political figures in South Africa.[82] With further protests, the ANC's membership grew from 20,000 to 100,000 members; the government responded with mass arrests and introduced the Public Safety Act, 1953 to permit martial law.[83] In May, authorities banned Transvaal ANC President J. B. Marks from making public appearances; unable to maintain his position, he recommended secondnameplaceholder as his successor. Although Africanists opposed his candidacy, secondnameplaceholder was elected to be regional president in October.[84]In July 1952, secondnameplaceholder was arrested under the Suppression of Communism Act and stood trial as one of the 21 accused—among them Moroka, Sisulu, and Yusuf Dadoo—in Johannesburg. Found guilty of "statutory communism", a term that the government used to describe most opposition to apartheid, their sentence of nine months' hard labour was suspended for two years.[85] In December, secondnameplaceholder was given a six-month ban from attending meetings or talking to more than one individual at a time, making his Transvaal ANC presidency impractical, and during this period the Defiance Campaign petered out.[86] In September 1953, Andrew Kunene read out secondnameplaceholder's "No Easy Walk to Freedom" speech at a Transvaal ANC meeting; the title was taken from a quote by Indian independence leader Jawaharlal Nehru, a seminal influence on secondnameplaceholder's thought. The speech laid out a contingency plan for a scenario in which the ANC was banned. This secondnameplaceholder Plan, or M-Plan, involved dividing the organisation into a cell structure with a more centralised leadership.[87]secondnameplaceholder obtained work as an attorney for the firm Terblanche and Briggish, before moving to the liberal-run Helman and Michel, passing qualification exams to become a full-fledged attorney.[88] In August 1953, secondnameplaceholder and Tambo opened their own law firm, secondnameplaceholder and Tambo, operating in downtown Johannesburg. The only African-run law firm in the country, it was popular with aggrieved Black people, often dealing with cases of police brutality. Disliked by the authorities, the firm was forced to relocate to a remote location after their office permit was removed under the Group Areas Act; as a result, their clientele dwindled.[89] As a lawyer of aristocratic heritage, secondnameplaceholder was part of Johannesburg's elite Black middle-class, and accorded much respect from the Black community.[90] Although a second daughter, Makaziwe Phumia, was born in May 1954, secondnameplaceholder's relationship with Evelyn became strained, and she accused him of adultery. He may have had affairs with ANC member Lillian Ngoyi and secretary Ruth Mompati; various individuals close to secondnameplaceholder in this period have stated that the latter bore him a child.[91] Disgusted by her son's behaviour, Nosekeni returned to Transkei, while Evelyn embraced the Jehovah's Witnesses and rejected secondnameplaceholder's preoccupation with politics.[92]After taking part in the unsuccessful protest to prevent the forced relocation of all Black people from the Sophiatown suburb of Johannesburg in February 1955, secondnameplaceholder concluded that violent action would prove necessary to end apartheid and white minority rule.[94] On his advice, Sisulu requested weaponry from the People's Republic of China, which was denied. Although the Chinese government supported the anti-apartheid struggle, they believed the movement insufficiently prepared for guerrilla warfare.[95] With the involvement of the South African Indian Congress, the Coloured People's Congress, the South African Congress of Trade Unions and the Congress of Democrats, the ANC planned a Congress of the People, calling on all South Africans to send in proposals for a post-apartheid era. Based on the responses, a Freedom Charter was drafted by Rusty Bernstein, calling for the creation of a democratic, non-racialist state with the nationalisation of major industry. The charter was adopted at a June 1955 conference in Kliptown; 3,000 delegates attended the event, which was forcibly closed down by police.[96] The tenets of the Freedom Charter remained important for secondnameplaceholder, and in 1956 he described it as "an inspiration to the people of South Africa".[97]Following the end of a second ban in September 1955, secondnameplaceholder went on a working holiday to Transkei to discuss the implications of the Bantu Authorities Act, 1951 with local tribal leaders, also visiting his mother and Noengland before proceeding to Cape Town.[98] In March 1956 he received his third ban on public appearances, restricting him to Johannesburg for five years, but he often defied it.[99] secondnameplaceholder's marriage broke down and Evelyn left him, taking their children to live with her brother. Initiating divorce proceedings in May 1956, she claimed that secondnameplaceholder had physically abused her; he denied the allegations, and fought for custody of their children.[100] She withdrew her petition of separation in November, but secondnameplaceholder filed for divorce in January 1958; the divorce was finalised in March, with the children placed in Evelyn's care.[101] During the divorce proceedings, he began courting a social worker, Winnie Madikizela, whom he married in Bizana in June 1958. She later became involved in ANC activities, spending several weeks in prison.[102] Together they had two children: Zenani, born in February 1959, and Zindziswa (1960–2020).[103]In December 1956, secondnameplaceholder was arrested alongside most of the ANC national executive, and accused of "high treason" against the state. Held in Johannesburg Prison amid mass protests, they underwent a preparatory examination before being granted bail.[104] The defence's refutation began in January 1957, overseen by defence lawyer Vernon Berrangé, and continued until the case was adjourned in September. In January 1958, Oswald Pirow was appointed to prosecute the case, and in February the judge ruled that there was "sufficient reason" for the defendants to go on trial in the Transvaal Supreme Court.[105] The formal Treason Trial began in Pretoria in August 1958, with the defendants successfully applying to have the three judges—all linked to the governing National Party—replaced. In August, one charge was dropped, and in October the prosecution withdrew its indictment, submitting a reformulated version in November which argued that the ANC leadership committed high treason by advocating violent revolution, a charge the defendants denied.[106]In April 1959, Africanists dissatisfied with the ANC's united front approach founded the Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC); secondnameplaceholder disagreed with the PAC's racially exclusionary views, describing them as "immature" and "naïve".[107] Both parties took part in an anti-pass campaign in early 1960, in which Africans burned the passes that they were legally obliged to carry. One of the PAC-organised demonstrations was fired upon by police, resulting in the deaths of 69 protesters in the Sharpeville massacre. The incident brought international condemnation of the government and resulted in rioting throughout South Africa, with secondnameplaceholder publicly burning his pass in solidarity.[108]Responding to the unrest, the government implemented state of emergency measures, declaring martial law and banning the ANC and PAC; in March, they arrested secondnameplaceholder and other activists, imprisoning them for five months without charge in the unsanitary conditions of the Pretoria Local prison.[109] Imprisonment caused problems for secondnameplaceholder and his co-defendants in the Treason Trial; their lawyers could not reach them, and so it was decided that the lawyers would withdraw in protest until the accused were freed from prison when the state of emergency was lifted in late August 1960.[110] Over the following months, secondnameplaceholder used his free time to organise an All-In African Conference near Pietermaritzburg, Natal, in March 1961, at which 1,400 anti-apartheid delegates met, agreeing on a stay-at-home strike to mark 31 May, the day South Africa became a republic.[111] On 29 March 1961, six years after the Treason Trial began, the judges produced a verdict of not guilty, ruling that there was insufficient evidence to convict the accused of "high treason", since they had advocated neither communism nor violent revolution; the outcome embarrassed the government.[112]Disguised as a chauffeur, secondnameplaceholder travelled around the country incognito, organising the ANC's new cell structure and the planned mass stay-at-home strike. Referred to as the "Black Pimpernel" in the press—a reference to Emma Orczy's 1905 novel The Scarlet Pimpernel—a warrant for his arrest was put out by the police.[113] secondnameplaceholder held secret meetings with reporters, and after the government failed to prevent the strike, he warned them that many anti-apartheid activists would soon resort to violence through groups like the PAC's Poqo.[114] He believed that the ANC should form an armed group to channel some of this violence in a controlled direction, convincing both ANC leader Albert Luthuli—who was morally opposed to violence—and allied activist groups of its necessity.[115]Inspired by the actions of Fidel Castro's 26th of July Movement in the Cuban Revolution, in 1961 secondnameplaceholder, Sisulu, and Slovo co-founded Umkhonto we Sizwe ("Spear of the Nation", abbreviated MK). Becoming chairman of the militant group, secondnameplaceholder gained ideas from literature on guerrilla warfare by Marxist militants Mao and Che Guevara as well as from the military theorist Carl von Clausewitz.[116] Although initially declared officially separate from the ANC so as not to taint the latter's reputation, MK was later widely recognised as the party's armed wing.[117] Most early MK members were white communists who were able to conceal secondnameplaceholder in their homes; after hiding in communist Wolfie Kodesh's flat in Berea, secondnameplaceholder moved to the communist-owned Liliesleaf Farm in Rivonia, there joined by Raymond Mhlaba, Slovo, and Bernstein, who put together the MK constitution.[118] Although in later life secondnameplaceholder denied, for political reasons, ever being a member of the Communist Party, historical research published in 2011 strongly suggested that he had joined in the late 1950s or early 1960s.[119] This was confirmed by both the SACP and the ANC after secondnameplaceholder's death. According to the SACP, he was not only a member of the party, but also served on its Central Committee.[120][121]Operating through a cell structure, MK planned to carry out acts of sabotage that would exert maximum pressure on the government with minimum casualties; they sought to bomb military installations, power plants, telephone lines, and transport links at night, when civilians were not present. secondnameplaceholder stated that they chose sabotage because it was the least harmful action, did not involve killing, and offered the best hope for racial reconciliation afterwards; he nevertheless acknowledged that should this have failed then guerrilla warfare might have been necessary.[123] Soon after ANC leader Luthuli was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, MK publicly announced its existence with 57 bombings on Dingane's Day (16 December) 1961, followed by further attacks on New Year's Eve.[124]The ANC decided to send secondnameplaceholder as a delegate to the February 1962 meeting of the Pan-African Freedom Movement for East, Central and Southern Africa (PAFMECSA) in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.[125] Leaving South Africa in secret via Bechuanaland, on his way secondnameplaceholder visited Tanganyika and met with its president, Julius Nyerere.[126] Arriving in Ethiopia, secondnameplaceholder met with Emperor Haile Selassie I, and gave his speech after Selassie's at the conference.[127] After the symposium, he travelled to Cairo, Egypt, admiring the political reforms of President Gamal Abdel Nasser, and then went to Tunis, Tunisia, where President Habib Bourguiba gave him £5,000 for weaponry. He proceeded to Morocco, Mali, Guinea, Sierra Leone, Liberia, and Senegal, receiving funds from Liberian President William Tubman and Guinean President Ahmed Sékou Touré.[128] He left Africa for London, England, where he met anti-apartheid activists, reporters, and prominent politicians.[129] Upon returning to Ethiopia, he began a six-month course in guerrilla warfare, but completed only two months before being recalled to South Africa by the ANC's leadership.[130]
<h2>Imprisonment</h2>
On 5 August 1962, police captured secondnameplaceholder along with fellow activist Cecil Williams near Howick.[131] Many MK members suspected that the authorities had been tipped off with regard to secondnameplaceholder's whereabouts, although secondnameplaceholder himself gave these ideas little credence.[132] In later years, Donald Rickard, a former American diplomat revealed that the Central Intelligence Agency, who feared secondnameplaceholder's associations with communists, had informed the South African police of his location.[133][134] Jailed in Johannesburg's Marshall Square prison, secondnameplaceholder was charged with inciting workers' strikes and leaving the country without permission. Representing himself with Slovo as legal advisor, secondnameplaceholder intended to use the trial to showcase "the ANC's moral opposition to racism" while supporters demonstrated outside the court.[135] Moved to Pretoria, where Winnie could visit him, he began correspondence studies for a Bachelor of Laws (LLB) degree from the University of London International Programmes.[136] His hearing began in October, but he disrupted proceedings by wearing a traditional kaross, refusing to call any witnesses, and turning his plea of mitigation into a political speech. Found guilty, he was sentenced to five years' imprisonment; as he left the courtroom, supporters sang "Nkosi Sikelel iAfrika".[137]On 11 July 1963, police raided Liliesleaf Farm, arresting those they found there and uncovering paperwork documenting MK's activities, some of which mentioned secondnameplaceholder. The Rivonia Trial began at Pretoria Supreme Court in October, with secondnameplaceholder and his comrades charged with four counts of sabotage and conspiracy to violently overthrow the government; their chief prosecutor was Percy Yutar.[140] Judge Quartus de Wet soon threw out the prosecution's case for insufficient evidence, but Yutar reformulated the charges, presenting his new case from December 1963 until February 1964, calling 173 witnesses and bringing thousands of documents and photographs to the trial.[141]Although four of the accused denied involvement with MK, secondnameplaceholder and the other five accused admitted sabotage but denied that they had ever agreed to initiate guerrilla war against the government.[142] They used the trial to highlight their political cause; at the opening of the defence's proceedings, secondnameplaceholder gave his three-hour "I Am Prepared to Die" speech. That speech—which was inspired by Castro's "History Will Absolve Me"—was widely reported in the press despite official censorship.[143] The trial gained international attention; there were global calls for the release of the accused from the United Nations and World Peace Council, while the University of London Union voted secondnameplaceholder to its presidency.[144] On 12 June 1964, justice De Wet found secondnameplaceholder and two of his co-accused guilty on all four charges; although the prosecution had called for the death sentence to be applied, the judge instead condemned them to life imprisonment.[145]In 1964, secondnameplaceholder and his co-accused were transferred from Pretoria to the prison on Robben Island, remaining there for the next 18 years.[146] Isolated from non-political prisoners in Section B, secondnameplaceholder was imprisoned in a damp concrete cell measuring 8 feet (2.4 m) by 7 feet (2.1 m), with a straw mat on which to sleep.[147] Verbally and physically harassed by several white prison wardens, the Rivonia Trial prisoners spent their days breaking rocks into gravel, until being reassigned in January 1965 to work in a lime quarry. secondnameplaceholder was initially forbidden to wear sunglasses, and the glare from the lime permanently damaged his eyesight.[148] At night, he worked on his LLB degree which he was obtaining from the University of London through a correspondence course with Wolsey Hall, Oxford, but newspapers were forbidden, and he was locked in solitary confinement on several occasions for the possession of smuggled news clippings.[149] He was initially classified as the lowest grade of prisoner, Class D, meaning that he was permitted one visit and one letter every six months, although all mail was heavily censored.[150]The political prisoners took part in work and hunger strikes—the latter considered largely ineffective by secondnameplaceholder—to improve prison conditions, viewing this as a microcosm of the anti-apartheid struggle.[151] ANC prisoners elected him to their four-man "High Organ" along with Sisulu, Govan Mbeki, and Raymond Mhlaba, and he involved himself in a group representing all political prisoners (including Eddie Daniels) on the island, Ulundi, through which he forged links with PAC and Yu Chi Chan Club members.[152] Initiating the "University of Robben Island", whereby prisoners lectured on their own areas of expertise, he debated socio-political topics with his comrades.[153]Though attending Christian Sunday services, secondnameplaceholder studied Islam.[154] He also studied Afrikaans, hoping to build a mutual respect with the warders and convert them to his cause.[155] Various official visitors met with secondnameplaceholder, most significantly the liberal parliamentary representative Helen Suzman of the Progressive Party, who championed secondnameplaceholder's cause outside of prison.[156] In September 1970, he met British Labour Party politician Denis Healey.[157] South African Minister of Justice Jimmy Kruger visited in December 1974, but he and secondnameplaceholder did not get along with each other.[158] His mother visited in 1968, dying shortly after, and his firstborn son Thembi died in a car accident the following year; secondnameplaceholder was forbidden from attending either funeral.[159] His wife was rarely able to see him, being regularly imprisoned for political activity, and his daughters first visited in December 1975. Winnie was released from prison in 1977 but was forcibly settled in Brandfort and remained unable to see him.[160]From 1967 onwards, prison conditions improved. Black prisoners were given trousers rather than shorts, games were permitted, and the standard of their food was raised.[161] In 1969, an escape plan for secondnameplaceholder was developed by Gordon Bruce, but it was abandoned after the conspiracy was infiltrated by an agent of the South African Bureau of State Security (BOSS), who hoped to see secondnameplaceholder shot during the escape.[162] In 1970, Commander Piet Badenhorst became commanding officer. secondnameplaceholder, seeing an increase in the physical and mental abuse of prisoners, complained to visiting judges, who had Badenhorst reassigned.[163] He was replaced by Commander Willie Willemse, who developed a co-operative relationship with secondnameplaceholder and was keen to improve prison standards.[164]By 1975, secondnameplaceholder had become a Class A prisoner,[166] which allowed him greater numbers of visits and letters. He corresponded with anti-apartheid activists like Mangosuthu Buthelezi and Desmond Tutu.[167] That year, he began his autobiography, which was smuggled to London, but remained unpublished at the time; prison authorities discovered several pages, and his LLB study privileges were revoked for four years.[168] Instead, he devoted his spare time to gardening and reading until the authorities permitted him to resume his LLB degree studies in 1980.[169]By the late 1960s, secondnameplaceholder's fame had been eclipsed by Steve Biko and the Black Consciousness Movement (BCM). Seeing the ANC as ineffectual, the BCM called for militant action, but following the Soweto uprising of 1976, many BCM activists were imprisoned on Robben Island.[170] secondnameplaceholder tried to build a relationship with these young radicals, although he was critical of their racialism and contempt for white anti-apartheid activists.[171] Renewed international interest in his plight came in July 1978, when he celebrated his 60th birthday.[172] He was awarded an honorary doctorate in Lesotho, the Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Understanding in India in 1979, and the Freedom of the City of Glasgow, Scotland in 1981.[173] In March 1980, the slogan "Free secondnameplaceholder!" was developed by journalist Percy Qoboza, sparking an international campaign that led the UN Security Council to call for his release.[174] Despite increasing foreign pressure, the government refused, relying on its Cold War allies US President Ronald Reagan and UK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher; both considered secondnameplaceholder's ANC a terrorist organisation sympathetic to communism, and supported its suppression.[175]In April 1982, secondnameplaceholder was transferred to Pollsmoor Prison in Tokai, Cape Town, along with senior ANC leaders Walter Sisulu, Andrew Mlangeni, Ahmed Kathrada, and Raymond Mhlaba; they believed that they were being isolated to remove their influence on younger activists at Robben Island.[176] Conditions at Pollsmoor were better than at Robben Island, although secondnameplaceholder missed the camaraderie and scenery of the island.[177] Getting on well with Pollsmoor's commanding officer, Brigadier Munro, secondnameplaceholder was permitted to create a roof garden;[178] he also read voraciously and corresponded widely, now permitted 52 letters a year.[179] He was appointed patron of the multi-racial United Democratic Front (UDF), founded to combat reforms implemented by South African President P. W. Botha. Botha's National Party government had permitted Coloured and Indian citizens to vote for their own parliaments, which had control over education, health, and housing. But, Black Africans were excluded from the system. Like secondnameplaceholder, the UDF saw this as an attempt to divide the anti-apartheid movement on racial lines.[180]The early 1980s witnessed an escalation of violence across the country, and many predicted civil war. This was accompanied by economic stagnation as various multinational banks—under pressure from an international lobby—had stopped investing in South Africa. Numerous banks and Thatcher asked Botha to release secondnameplaceholder—then at the height of his international fame—to defuse the volatile situation.[181] Although considering secondnameplaceholder a dangerous "arch-Marxist",[182] in February 1985 Botha offered him a release from prison if he "unconditionally rejected violence as a political weapon". secondnameplaceholder spurned the offer, releasing a statement through his daughter Zindzi stating, "What freedom am I being offered while the organisation of the people [ANC] remains banned? Only free men can negotiate. A prisoner cannot enter into contracts."[183][184]In 1985, secondnameplaceholder underwent surgery on an enlarged prostate gland, before being given new solitary quarters on the ground floor.[185] He was met by "seven eminent persons", an international delegation sent to negotiate a settlement, but Botha's government refused to co-operate, calling a state of emergency in June and initiating a police crackdown on unrest.[186] The anti-apartheid resistance fought back, with the ANC committing 231 attacks in 1986 and 235 in 1987.[187] The violence escalated as the government used the army and police to combat the resistance and provided covert support for vigilante groups and the Zulu nationalist movement Inkatha, which was involved in an increasingly violent struggle with the ANC.[188] secondnameplaceholder requested talks with Botha but was denied, instead secretly meeting with Minister of Justice Kobie Coetsee in 1987, and having a further 11 meetings over the next three years. Coetsee organised negotiations between secondnameplaceholder and a team of four government figures starting in May 1988; the team agreed to the release of political prisoners and the legalisation of the ANC on the condition that they permanently renounce violence, break links with the Communist Party, and not insist on majority rule. secondnameplaceholder rejected these conditions, insisting that the ANC would end its armed activities only when the government renounced violence.[189]secondnameplaceholder's 70th birthday in July 1988 attracted international attention, including a tribute concert at London's Wembley Stadium that was televised and watched by an estimated 200 million viewers.[190] Although presented globally as a heroic figure, he faced personal problems when ANC leaders informed him that Winnie had set herself up as head of a gang, the "secondnameplaceholder United Football Club," which had been responsible for torturing and killing opponents—including children—in Soweto. Though some encouraged him to divorce her, he decided to remain loyal until she was found guilty by trial.[191]Recovering from tuberculosis exacerbated by the damp conditions in his cell,[192] in December 1988, secondnameplaceholder was moved to Victor Verster Prison near Paarl. He was housed in the relative comfort of a warder's house with a personal cook, and he used the time to complete his LLB degree.[193] While there, he was permitted many visitors and organised secret communications with exiled ANC leader Oliver Tambo.[194][195]In 1989, Botha suffered a stroke; although he would retain the state presidency, he stepped down as leader of the National Party, to be replaced by F. W. de Klerk.[196] In a surprise move, Botha invited secondnameplaceholder to a meeting over tea in July 1989, an invitation secondnameplaceholder considered genial.[197] Botha was replaced as state president by de Klerk six weeks later; the new president believed that apartheid was unsustainable and released a number of ANC prisoners.[198] Following the fall of the Berlin Wall in November 1989, de Klerk called his cabinet together to debate legalising the ANC and freeing secondnameplaceholder. Although some were deeply opposed to his plans, de Klerk met with secondnameplaceholder in December to discuss the situation, a meeting both men considered friendly, before legalising all formerly banned political parties in February 1990 and announcing secondnameplaceholder's unconditional release.[199][200] Shortly thereafter, for the first time in 20 years, photographs of secondnameplaceholder were allowed to be published in South Africa.[201]Leaving Victor Verster Prison on 11 February, secondnameplaceholder held Winnie's hand in front of amassed crowds and the press; the event was broadcast live across the world.[202][203] Driven to Cape Town's City Hall through crowds, he gave a speech declaring his commitment to peace and reconciliation with the white minority, but he made it clear that the ANC's armed struggle was not over and would continue as "a purely defensive action against the violence of apartheid". He expressed hope that the government would agree to negotiations, so that "there may no longer be the need for the armed struggle", and insisted that his main focus was to bring peace to the Black majority and give them the right to vote in national and local elections.[204][205] Staying at Tutu's home, in the following days secondnameplaceholder met with friends, activists, and press, giving a speech to an estimated 100,000 people at Johannesburg's FNB Stadium.[206]
<h2>End of apartheid</h2>
secondnameplaceholder proceeded on an African tour, meeting supporters and politicians in Zambia, Zimbabwe, Namibia, Libya and Algeria, and continuing to Sweden, where he was reunited with Tambo, and London, where he appeared at the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder: An International Tribute for a Free South Africa concert at Wembley Stadium.[207] Encouraging foreign countries to support sanctions against the apartheid government, he met President François Mitterrand in France, Pope John Paul II in the Vatican, and Thatcher in the United Kingdom. In the United States, he met President George H.W. Bush, addressed both Houses of Congress and visited eight cities, being particularly popular among the African-American community.[208] In Cuba, he became friends with President Castro, whom he had long admired.[209] He met President R. Venkataraman in India, President Suharto in Indonesia, Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad in Malaysia, and Prime Minister Bob Hawke in Australia. He visited Japan, but not the Soviet Union, a longtime ANC supporter.[210]In May 1990, secondnameplaceholder led a multiracial ANC delegation into preliminary negotiations with a government delegation of 11 Afrikaner men. secondnameplaceholder impressed them with his discussions of Afrikaner history, and the negotiations led to the Groot Schuur Minute, in which the government lifted the state of emergency.[211] In August, secondnameplaceholder—recognising the ANC's severe military disadvantage—offered a ceasefire, the Pretoria Minute, for which he was widely criticised by MK activists.[211] He spent much time trying to unify and build the ANC, appearing at a Johannesburg conference in December attended by 1600 delegates, many of whom found him more moderate than expected.[212] At the ANC's July 1991 national conference in Durban, secondnameplaceholder admitted that the party had faults and announced his aim to build a "strong and well-oiled task force" for securing majority rule.[213] At the conference, he was elected ANC President, replacing the ailing Tambo, and a 50-strong multiracial, mixed gendered national executive was elected.[213]secondnameplaceholder was given an office in the newly purchased ANC headquarters at Shell House, Johannesburg, and moved into Winnie's large Soweto home.[214] Their marriage was increasingly strained as he learned of her affair with Dali Mpofu, but he supported her during her trial for kidnapping and assault. He gained funding for her defence from the International Defence and Aid Fund for Southern Africa and from Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi, but in June 1991, she was found guilty and sentenced to six years in prison, reduced to two on appeal. On 13 April 1992, secondnameplaceholder publicly announced his separation from Winnie. The ANC forced her to step down from the national executive for misappropriating ANC funds; secondnameplaceholder moved into the mostly white Johannesburg suburb of Houghton.[215] secondnameplaceholder's prospects for a peaceful transition were further damaged by an increase in "Black-on-Black" violence, particularly between ANC and Inkatha supporters in KwaZulu-Natal, which resulted in thousands of deaths. secondnameplaceholder met with Inkatha leader Buthelezi, but the ANC prevented further negotiations on the issue. secondnameplaceholder argued that there was a "third force" within the state intelligence services fuelling the "slaughter of the people" and openly blamed de Klerk—whom he increasingly distrusted—for the Sebokeng massacre.[216] In September 1991, a national peace conference was held in Johannesburg at which secondnameplaceholder, Buthelezi and de Klerk signed a peace accord, though the violence continued.[217]The Convention for a Democratic South Africa (CODESA) began in December 1991 at the Johannesburg World Trade Centre, attended by 228 delegates from 19 political parties. Although Cyril Ramaphosa led the ANC's delegation, secondnameplaceholder remained a key figure. After de Klerk used the closing speech to condemn the ANC's violence, he took to the stage to denounce de Klerk as the "head of an illegitimate, discredited minority regime". Dominated by the National Party and ANC, little negotiation was achieved.[218] CODESA 2 was held in May 1992, at which de Klerk insisted that post-apartheid South Africa must use a federal system with a rotating presidency to ensure the protection of ethnic minorities; secondnameplaceholder opposed this, demanding a unitary system governed by majority rule.[219] Following the Boipatong massacre of ANC activists by government-aided Inkatha militants, secondnameplaceholder called off the negotiations, before attending a meeting of the Organisation of African Unity in Senegal, at which he called for a special session of the UN Security Council and proposed that a UN peacekeeping force be stationed in South Africa to prevent "state terrorism".[220] Calling for domestic mass action, in August the ANC organised the largest-ever strike in South African history, and supporters marched on Pretoria.[221]Following the Bisho massacre, in which 28 ANC supporters and one soldier were shot dead by the Ciskei Defence Force during a protest march, secondnameplaceholder realised that mass action was leading to further violence and resumed negotiations in September. He agreed to do so on the conditions that all political prisoners be released, that Zulu traditional weapons be banned, and that Zulu hostels would be fenced off, the latter two measures intended to prevent further Inkatha attacks; de Klerk reluctantly agreed.[222] The negotiations agreed that a multiracial general election would be held, resulting in a five-year coalition government of national unity and a constitutional assembly that gave the National Party continuing influence. The ANC also conceded to safeguarding the jobs of white civil servants; such concessions brought fierce internal criticism.[223] The duo agreed on an interim constitution based on a liberal democratic model, guaranteeing separation of powers, creating a constitutional court, and including a US-style bill of rights; it also divided the country into nine provinces, each with its own premier and civil service, a concession between de Klerk's desire for federalism and secondnameplaceholder's for unitary government.[224]The democratic process was threatened by the Concerned South Africans Group (COSAG), an alliance of Black ethnic-secessionist groups like Inkatha and far-right Afrikaner parties; in June 1993, one of the latter—the Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging (AWB)—attacked the Kempton Park World Trade Centre.[225] Following the murder of ANC activist Chris Hani, secondnameplaceholder made a publicised speech to calm rioting, soon after appearing at a mass funeral in Soweto for Tambo, who had died of a stroke.[226] In July 1993, both secondnameplaceholder and de Klerk visited the US, independently meeting President Bill Clinton and each receiving the Liberty Medal.[227] Soon after, secondnameplaceholder and de Klerk were jointly awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in Norway.[228] Influenced by Thabo Mbeki, secondnameplaceholder began meeting with big business figures, and played down his support for nationalisation, fearing that he would scare away much-needed foreign investment. Although criticised by socialist ANC members, he had been encouraged to embrace private enterprise by members of the Chinese and Vietnamese Communist parties at the January 1992 World Economic Forum in Switzerland.[229]With the election set for 27 April 1994, the ANC began campaigning, opening 100 election offices and orchestrating People's Forums across the country at which secondnameplaceholder could appear, as a popular figure with great status among Black South Africans.[230] The ANC campaigned on a Reconstruction and Development Programme (RDP) to build a million houses in five years, introduce universal free education and extend access to water and electricity. The party's slogan was "a better life for all", although it was not explained how this development would be funded.[231] With the exception of the Weekly Mail and the New Nation, South Africa's press opposed secondnameplaceholder's election, fearing continued ethnic strife, instead supporting the National or Democratic Party.[232] secondnameplaceholder devoted much time to fundraising for the ANC, touring North America, Europe and Asia to meet wealthy donors, including former supporters of the apartheid regime.[233] He also urged a reduction in the voting age from 18 to 14; rejected by the ANC, this policy became the subject of ridicule.[234]Concerned that COSAG would undermine the election, particularly in the wake of the conflict in Bophuthatswana and the Shell House massacre—incidents of violence involving the AWB and Inkatha, respectively—secondnameplaceholder met with Afrikaner politicians and generals, including P. W. Botha, Pik Botha and Constand Viljoen, persuading many to work within the democratic system. With de Klerk, he also convinced Inkatha's Buthelezi to enter the elections rather than launch a war of secession.[235] As leaders of the two major parties, de Klerk and secondnameplaceholder appeared on a televised debate; although de Klerk was widely considered the better speaker at the event, secondnameplaceholder's offer to shake his hand surprised him, leading some commentators to deem it a victory for secondnameplaceholder.[236] The election went ahead with little violence, although an AWB cell killed 20 with car bombs. As widely expected, the ANC won a sweeping victory, taking 63% of the vote, just short of the two-thirds majority needed to unilaterally change the constitution. The ANC was also victorious in seven provinces, with Inkatha and the National Party each taking one.[237][238] secondnameplaceholder voted at the Ohlange High School in Durban, and though the ANC's victory assured his election as president, he publicly accepted that the election had been marred by instances of fraud and sabotage.[239][240]
<h2>Presidency of South Africa: 1994–1999</h2>
The newly elected National Assembly's first act was to formally elect secondnameplaceholder as South Africa's first Black chief executive. His inauguration took place in Pretoria on 10 May 1994, televised to a billion viewers globally. The event was attended by four thousand guests, including world leaders from a wide range of geographic and ideological backgrounds.[241] secondnameplaceholder headed a Government of National Unity dominated by the ANC—which had no experience of governing by itself—but containing representatives from the National Party and Inkatha. Under the Interim Constitution, Inkatha and the National Party were entitled to seats in the government by virtue of winning at least 20 seats. In keeping with earlier agreements, both de Klerk and Thabo Mbeki were given the position of Deputy President.[242][243] Although Mbeki had not been his first choice for the job, secondnameplaceholder grew to rely heavily on him throughout his presidency, allowing him to shape policy details.[244] Moving into the presidential office at Tuynhuys in Cape Town, secondnameplaceholder allowed de Klerk to retain the presidential residence in the Groote Schuur estate, instead settling into the nearby Westbrooke manor, which he renamed "Genadendal", meaning "Valley of Mercy" in Afrikaans.[245] Retaining his Houghton home, he also had a house built in his home village of Qunu, which he visited regularly, walking around the area, meeting with locals, and judging tribal disputes.[246]Aged 76, he faced various ailments, and although exhibiting continued energy, he felt isolated and lonely.[247] He often entertained celebrities, such as Michael Jackson, Whoopi Goldberg, and the Spice Girls, and befriended ultra-rich businessmen, like Harry Oppenheimer of Anglo-American. He also met with Queen Elizabeth II on her March 1995 state visit to South Africa, which earned him strong criticism from ANC anti-capitalists.[248] Despite his opulent surroundings, secondnameplaceholder lived simply, donating a third of his R 552,000 annual income to the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Children's Fund, which he had founded in 1995.[249] Although dismantling press censorship, speaking out in favour of freedom of the press, and befriending many journalists, secondnameplaceholder was critical of much of the country's media, noting that it was overwhelmingly owned and run by middle-class whites and believing that it focused too heavily on scaremongering about crime.[250]In December 1994, secondnameplaceholder published Long Walk to Freedom, an autobiography based around a manuscript he had written in prison, augmented by interviews conducted with American journalist Richard Stengel.[251] In late 1994, he attended the 49th conference of the ANC in Bloemfontein, at which a more militant national executive was elected, among them Winnie secondnameplaceholder; although she expressed an interest in reconciling, firstnameplaceholder initiated divorce proceedings in August 1995.[252] By 1995, he had entered into a relationship with Graça Machel, a Mozambican political activist 27 years his junior who was the widow of former president Samora Machel. They had first met in July 1990 when she was still in mourning, but their friendship grew into a partnership, with Machel accompanying him on many of his foreign visits. She turned down secondnameplaceholder's first marriage proposal, wanting to retain some independence and dividing her time between Mozambique and Johannesburg.[253]Presiding over the transition from apartheid minority rule to a multicultural democracy, secondnameplaceholder saw national reconciliation as the primary task of his presidency.[255] Having seen other post-colonial African economies damaged by the departure of white elites, secondnameplaceholder worked to reassure South Africa's white population that they were protected and represented in "the Rainbow Nation".[256] Although his Government of National Unity would be dominated by the ANC,[257] he attempted to create a broad coalition by appointing de Klerk as Deputy President and appointing other National Party officials as ministers for Agriculture, Environment, and Minerals and Energy, as well as naming Buthelezi as Minister for Home Affairs.[258] The other cabinet positions were taken by ANC members, many of whom—like Joe Modise, Alfred Nzo, Joe Slovo, Mac Maharaj and Dullah Omar—had long been comrades of secondnameplaceholder, although others, such as Tito Mboweni and Jeff Radebe, were far younger.[259] secondnameplaceholder's relationship with de Klerk was strained; secondnameplaceholder thought that de Klerk was intentionally provocative, and de Klerk felt that he was being intentionally humiliated by the president.[260] In January 1995, secondnameplaceholder heavily chastised him for awarding amnesty to 3,500 police officers just before the election, and later criticised him for defending former Minister of Defence Magnus Malan when the latter was charged with murder.[260]secondnameplaceholder personally met with senior figures of the apartheid regime, including Hendrik Verwoerd's widow, Betsie Schoombie, and lawyer Percy Yutar, also laying a wreath by the statue of Afrikaner hero Daniel Theron.[261] Emphasising personal forgiveness and reconciliation, he announced that "courageous people do not fear forgiving, for the sake of peace."[262] He encouraged Black South Africans to get behind the previously hated national rugby team, the Springboks, as South Africa hosted the 1995 Rugby World Cup. secondnameplaceholder wore a Springbok shirt at the final against New Zealand, and after the Springboks won the match, secondnameplaceholder presented the trophy to captain Francois Pienaar, an Afrikaner. This was widely seen as a major step in the reconciliation of white and Black South Africans; as de Klerk later put it, "secondnameplaceholder won the hearts of millions of white rugby fans."[263][264] secondnameplaceholder's efforts at reconciliation assuaged the fears of white people, but also drew criticism from more militant Black people.[265] Among the latter was his estranged wife, Winnie, who accused the ANC of being more interested in appeasing the white community than in helping the Black majority.[266]secondnameplaceholder oversaw the formation of a Truth and Reconciliation Commission to investigate crimes committed under apartheid by both the government and the ANC, appointing Tutu as its chair. To prevent the creation of martyrs, the commission granted individual amnesties in exchange for testimony of crimes committed during the apartheid era. Dedicated in February 1996, it held two years of hearings detailing rapes, torture, bombings, and assassinations, before issuing its final report in October 1998. Both de Klerk and Mbeki appealed to have parts of the report suppressed, though only de Klerk's appeal was successful.[267] secondnameplaceholder praised the commission's work, stating that it "had helped us move away from the past to concentrate on the present and the future".[268]secondnameplaceholder's administration inherited a country with a huge disparity in wealth and services between white and black communities. Of a population of 40 million, around 23 million lacked electricity or adequate sanitation, and 12 million lacked clean water supplies, with 2 million children not in school and a third of the population illiterate. There was 33% unemployment, and just under half of the population lived below the poverty line.[269] Government financial reserves were nearly depleted, with a fifth of the national budget being spent on debt repayment, meaning that the extent of the promised Reconstruction and Development Programme (RDP) was scaled back, with none of the proposed nationalisation or job creation.[270] In 1996, the RDP was replaced with a new policy, Growth, Employment and Redistribution (GEAR), which maintained South Africa's mixed economy but placed an emphasis on economic growth through a framework of market economics and the encouragement of foreign investment; many in the ANC derided it as a neo-liberal policy that did not address social inequality, no matter how secondnameplaceholder defended it.[271] In adopting this approach, secondnameplaceholder's government adhered to the "Washington consensus" advocated by the World Bank and International Monetary Fund.[272]Under secondnameplaceholder's presidency, welfare spending increased by 13% in 1996/97, 13% in 1997/98, and 7% in 1998/99.[273] The government introduced parity in grants for communities, including disability grants, child maintenance grants, and old-age pensions, which had previously been set at different levels for South Africa's different racial groups.[273] In 1994, free healthcare was introduced for children under six and pregnant women, a provision extended to all those using primary level public sector health care services in 1996.[274][275] By the 1999 election, the ANC could boast that due to their policies, 3 million people were connected to telephone lines, 1.5 million children were brought into the education system, 500 clinics were upgraded or constructed, 2 million people were connected to the electricity grid, water access was extended to 3 million people, and 750,000 houses were constructed, housing nearly 3 million people.[276]The Land Reform Act 3 of 1996 safeguarded the rights of labour tenants living on farms where they grew crops or grazed livestock. This legislation ensured that such tenants could not be evicted without a court order or if they were over the age of 65.[277] Recognising that arms manufacturing was a key industry for the South African economy, secondnameplaceholder endorsed the trade in weapons but brought in tighter regulations surrounding Armscor to ensure that South African weaponry was not sold to authoritarian regimes.[278] Under secondnameplaceholder's administration, tourism was increasingly promoted, becoming a major sector of the South African economy.[279]Critics like Edwin Cameron accused secondnameplaceholder's government of doing little to stem the HIV/AIDS pandemic in the country; by 1999, 10% of South Africa's population were HIV positive. secondnameplaceholder later admitted that he had personally neglected the issue, in part due to public reticence in discussing issues surrounding sex in South Africa, and that he had instead left the issue for Mbeki to deal with.[280][281] secondnameplaceholder also received criticism for failing to sufficiently combat crime; South Africa had one of the world's highest crime rates,[282] and the activities of international crime syndicates in the country grew significantly throughout the decade.[283] secondnameplaceholder's administration was also perceived as having failed to deal with the problem of corruption.[284]Further problems were caused by the exodus of thousands of skilled white South Africans from the country, who were escaping the increasing crime rates, higher taxes, and the impact of positive discrimination toward Black people in employment. This exodus resulted in a brain drain, and secondnameplaceholder criticised those who left.[285] At the same time, South Africa experienced an influx of millions of illegal migrants from poorer parts of Africa; although public opinion toward these illegal immigrants was generally unfavourable, characterising them as disease-spreading criminals who were a drain on resources, secondnameplaceholder called on South Africans to embrace them as "brothers and sisters".[286]secondnameplaceholder expressed the view that "South Africa's future foreign relations [should] be based on our belief that human rights should be the core of international relations".[287] Following the South African example, secondnameplaceholder encouraged other nations to resolve conflicts through diplomacy and reconciliation.[288] In September 1998, secondnameplaceholder was appointed secretary-general of the Non-Aligned Movement, who held their annual conference in Durban. He used the event to criticise the "narrow, chauvinistic interests" of the Israeli government in stalling negotiations to end the Israeli–Palestinian conflict and urged India and Pakistan to negotiate to end the Kashmir conflict, for which he was criticised by both Israel and India.[289] Inspired by the region's economic boom, secondnameplaceholder sought greater economic relations with East Asia, in particular with Malaysia, although this was prevented by the 1997 Asian financial crisis.[290] He extended diplomatic recognition to the People's Republic of China (PRC), who were growing as an economic force, and initially also to Taiwan, who were already longstanding investors in the South African economy. However, under pressure from the PRC, in November 1996 he cut recognition of Taiwan, and in May 1999 paid an official visit to Beijing.[291]secondnameplaceholder attracted controversy for his close relationship with Indonesian president Suharto, whose regime was responsible for mass human rights abuses, although on a July 1997 visit to Indonesia he privately urged Suharto to withdraw from the occupation of East Timor.[293] He also faced similar criticism from the West for his government's trade links to Syria, Cuba, and Libya,[294] and for his personal friendships with Castro and Gaddafi.[295] Castro visited in 1998 to widespread popular acclaim, and secondnameplaceholder met Gaddafi in Libya to award him the Order of Good Hope.[295] When Western governments and media criticised these visits, secondnameplaceholder lambasted such criticism as having racist undertones,[296] and stated that "the enemies of countries in the West are not our enemies."[294] secondnameplaceholder hoped to resolve the long-running dispute between Libya and the US and Britain over bringing to trial the two Libyans, Abdelbaset al-Megrahi and Lamin Khalifah Fhimah, who were indicted in November 1991 and accused of sabotaging Pan Am Flight 103. secondnameplaceholder proposed that they be tried in a third country, which was agreed to by all parties; governed by Scots law, the trial was held at Camp Zeist in the Netherlands in April 1999, and found one of the two men guilty.[297][298]secondnameplaceholder echoed Mbeki's calls for an "African Renaissance", and was greatly concerned with issues on the continent.[299] He took a soft diplomatic approach to removing Sani Abacha's military junta in Nigeria but later became a leading figure in calling for sanctions when Abacha's regime increased human rights violations.[300] In 1996, he was appointed chairman of the Southern African Development Community (SADC) and initiated unsuccessful negotiations to end the First Congo War in Zaire.[301] He also played a key role as a mediator in the ethnic conflict between Tutsi and Hutu political groups in the Burundian Civil War, helping to initiate a settlement which brought increased stability to the country but did not end the ethnic violence.[302] In South Africa's first post-apartheid military operation, troops were ordered in September 1998 into Lesotho to protect the government of Prime Minister Pakalitha Mosisili after a disputed election prompted opposition uprisings. The action was not authorised by secondnameplaceholder himself, who was out of the country at the time, but by Buthelezi, who was serving as acting president during secondnameplaceholder's absence.[303]The new Constitution of South Africa was agreed upon by parliament in May 1996, enshrining a series of institutions to place checks on political and administrative authority within a constitutional democracy.[304] De Klerk opposed the implementation of this constitution, and that month he and the National Party withdrew from the coalition government in protest, claiming that the ANC were not treating them as equals.[305] The ANC took over the cabinet positions formerly held by the Nationalists, with Mbeki becoming sole Deputy President.[306] Inkatha remained part of the coalition,[307] and when both secondnameplaceholder and Mbeki were out of the country in September 1998, Buthelezi was appointed "Acting President", marking an improvement in his relationship with secondnameplaceholder.[308] Although secondnameplaceholder had often governed decisively in his first two years as president,[309] he had subsequently increasingly delegated duties to Mbeki, retaining only a close personal supervision of intelligence and security measures.[310] During a 1997 visit to London, he said that "the ruler of South Africa, the de facto ruler, is Thabo Mbeki" and that he was "shifting everything to him".[309]secondnameplaceholder stepped down as ANC President at the party's December 1997 conference. He hoped that Ramaphosa would succeed him, believing Mbeki to be too inflexible and intolerant of criticism, but the ANC elected Mbeki regardless.[311] secondnameplaceholder and the Executive supported Jacob Zuma, a Zulu who had been imprisoned on Robben Island, as Mbeki's replacement for Deputy President. Zuma's candidacy was challenged by Winnie, whose populist rhetoric had gained her a strong following within the party, although Zuma defeated her in a landslide victory vote at the election.[312]secondnameplaceholder's relationship with Machel had intensified; in February 1998, he publicly stated that he was "in love with a remarkable lady", and under pressure from Tutu, who urged him to set an example for young people, he organised a wedding for his 80th birthday, in July that year.[313] The following day, he held a grand party with many foreign dignitaries.[314] Although the 1996 constitution allowed the president to serve two consecutive five-year terms, secondnameplaceholder had never planned to stand for a second term in office. He gave his farewell speech to Parliament on 29 March 1999 when it adjourned prior to the 1999 general elections, after which he retired.[315] Although opinion polls in South Africa showed wavering support for both the ANC and the government, secondnameplaceholder himself remained highly popular, with 80% of South Africans polled in 1999 expressing satisfaction with his performance as president.[316]
<h2>Retirement</h2>
Retiring in June 1999, secondnameplaceholder aimed to lead a quiet family life, divided between Johannesburg and Qunu. Although he set about authoring a sequel to his first autobiography, to be titled The Presidential Years, it was abandoned before publication.[317] secondnameplaceholder found such seclusion difficult and reverted to a busy public life involving daily programme of tasks, meetings with world leaders and celebrities, and—when in Johannesburg—working with the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Foundation, founded in 1999 to focus on rural development, school construction, and combating HIV/AIDS.[318] Although he had been heavily criticised for failing to do enough to fight the HIV/AIDS pandemic during his presidency, he devoted much of his time to the issue following his retirement, describing it as "a war" that had killed more than "all previous wars"; affiliating himself with the Treatment Action Campaign, he urged Mbeki's government to ensure that HIV-positive South Africans had access to anti-retrovirals.[319] Meanwhile, secondnameplaceholder was successfully treated for prostate cancer in July 2001.[320][321]In 2002, secondnameplaceholder inaugurated the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Annual Lecture, and in 2003 the secondnameplaceholder Rhodes Foundation was created at Rhodes House, University of Oxford, to provide postgraduate scholarships to African students. These projects were followed by the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Centre of Memory and the 46664 campaign against HIV/AIDS.[322] He gave the closing address at the XIII International AIDS Conference in Durban in 2000,[323] and in 2004, spoke at the XV International AIDS Conference in Bangkok, Thailand, calling for greater measures to tackle tuberculosis as well as HIV/AIDS.[324] secondnameplaceholder publicised AIDS as the cause of his son Makgatho's death in January 2005, to defy the stigma about discussing the disease.[325]Publicly, secondnameplaceholder became more vocal in criticising Western powers. He strongly opposed the 1999 NATO intervention in Kosovo and called it an attempt by the world's powerful nations to police the entire world.[326] In 2003, he spoke out against the plans for the United States to launch a war in Iraq, describing it as "a tragedy" and lambasting US President George W. Bush and UK Prime Minister Tony Blair (whom he referred to as an "American foreign minister") for undermining the UN, saying, "All that (Mr. Bush) wants is Iraqi oil".[327] He attacked the US more generally, asserting that "If there is a country that has committed unspeakable atrocities in the world, it is the United States of America", citing the atomic bombing of Japan; this attracted international controversy, although he later improved his relationship with Bush.[328][329] Retaining an interest in the Lockerbie suspect, he visited Megrahi in Barlinnie prison and spoke out against the conditions of his treatment, referring to them as "psychological persecution".[330]In June 2004, aged 85 and amid failing health, secondnameplaceholder announced that he was "retiring from retirement" and retreating from public life, remarking, "Don't call me, I will call you."[331] Although continuing to meet with close friends and family, the foundation discouraged invitations for him to appear at public events and denied most interview requests.[320]He retained some involvement in international affairs. In 2005, he founded the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Legacy Trust,[332] travelling to the US to speak before the Brookings Institution and the NAACP on the need for economic assistance to Africa.[332][333] He spoke with US Senator Hillary Clinton and President George W. Bush and first met the then-Senator Barack Obama.[333] secondnameplaceholder also encouraged Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe to resign over growing human rights abuses in the country. When this proved ineffective, he spoke out publicly against Mugabe in 2007, asking him to step down "with residual respect and a modicum of dignity."[334] That year, secondnameplaceholder, Machel, and Desmond Tutu convened a group of world leaders in Johannesburg to contribute their wisdom and independent leadership to some of the world's toughest problems. secondnameplaceholder announced the formation of this new group, The Elders, in a speech delivered on his 89th birthday.[335]secondnameplaceholder's 90th birthday was marked across the country on 18 July 2008, with the main celebrations held at Qunu,[336] and a concert in his honour in Hyde Park, London.[337] In a speech marking the event, secondnameplaceholder called for the rich to help the poor across the world.[336] Throughout Mbeki's presidency, secondnameplaceholder continued to support the ANC, usually overshadowing Mbeki at any public events that the two attended. secondnameplaceholder was more at ease with Mbeki's successor, Zuma,[338] although the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Foundation was upset when his grandson, Mandla secondnameplaceholder, flew him out to the Eastern Cape to attend a pro-Zuma rally in the midst of a storm in 2009.[338]In 2004, secondnameplaceholder successfully campaigned for South Africa to host the 2010 FIFA World Cup, declaring that there would be "few better gifts for us" in the year marking a decade since the fall of apartheid.[339] Despite maintaining a low profile during the event due to ill-health, secondnameplaceholder made his final public appearance during the World Cup closing ceremony, where he received much applause.[340][341] Between 2005 and 2013, secondnameplaceholder, and later his family, were embroiled in a series of legal disputes regarding money held in family trusts for the benefit of his descendants.[342] In mid-2013, as secondnameplaceholder was hospitalised for a lung infection in Pretoria, his descendants were involved in an intra-family legal dispute relating to the burial place of secondnameplaceholder's children, and ultimately secondnameplaceholder himself.[343]In February 2011, secondnameplaceholder was briefly hospitalised with a respiratory infection, attracting international attention,[344][345] before being re-admitted for a lung infection and gallstone removal in December 2012.[346][347] After a successful medical procedure in early March 2013,[348] his lung infection recurred and he was briefly hospitalised in Pretoria.[349] In June 2013, his lung infection worsened and he was readmitted to a Pretoria hospital in serious condition.[350] The Archbishop of Cape Town Thabo Makgoba visited secondnameplaceholder at the hospital and prayed with Machel,[351] while Zuma cancelled a trip to Mozambique to visit him the following day.[352] In September 2013, secondnameplaceholder was discharged from hospital,[353] although his condition remained unstable.[354]After suffering from a prolonged respiratory infection, secondnameplaceholder died on 5 December 2013 at the age of 95, at around 20:50 local time at his home in Houghton, surrounded by his family.[355][356] Zuma publicly announced his death on television,[355][357] proclaiming ten days of national mourning, a memorial service held at Johannesburg's FNB Stadium on 10 December 2013, and 8 December as a national day of prayer and reflection. secondnameplaceholder's body lay in state from 11 to 13 December at the Union Buildings in Pretoria and a state funeral was held on 15 December in Qunu.[358][359] Approximately 90 representatives of foreign states travelled to South Africa to attend memorial events.[360] It was later revealed that 300 million rand originally earmarked for humanitarian development projects had been redirected to finance the funeral.[361] The media was awash with tributes and reminiscences,[362] while images of tributes to secondnameplaceholder proliferated across social media.[363] His US$4.1 million estate was left to his widow, other family members, staff, and educational institutions.[364]
<h2>Political ideology</h2>
secondnameplaceholder identified as both an African nationalist, an ideological position he held since joining the ANC,[366] and as a socialist.[367] He was a practical politician, rather than an intellectual scholar or political theorist.[368] According to biographer Tom Lodge, "for secondnameplaceholder, politics has always been primarily about enacting stories, about making narratives, primarily about morally exemplary conduct, and only secondarily about ideological vision, more about means rather than ends."[369]The historian Sabelo J. Ndlovu-Gatsheni described secondnameplaceholder as a "liberal African nationalist–decolonial humanist",[370] while political analyst Raymond Suttner cautioned against labelling secondnameplaceholder a liberal and stated that secondnameplaceholder displayed a "hybrid socio-political make-up".[371] secondnameplaceholder adopted some of his political ideas from other thinkers—among them Indian independence leaders like Gandhi and Nehru, African-American civil rights activists, and African nationalists like Nkrumah—and applied them to the South African situation. At the same time he rejected other aspects of their thought, such as the anti-white sentiment of many African nationalists.[372] In doing so he synthesised both counter-cultural and hegemonic views, for instance by drawing upon ideas from the then-dominant Afrikaner nationalism in promoting his anti-apartheid vision.[373]His political development was strongly influenced by his legal training and practice, in particular his hope to achieve change not through violence but through "legal revolution".[374] Over the course of his life, he began by advocating a path of non-violence, later embracing violence, and then adopting a non-violent approach to negotiation and reconciliation.[375] When endorsing violence, he did so because he saw no alternative, and was always pragmatic about it, perceiving it as a means to get his opponent to the negotiating table.[376] He sought to target symbols of white supremacy and racist oppression rather than white people as individuals, and was anxious not to inaugurate a race war in South Africa.[377] This willingness to use violence distinguishes secondnameplaceholder from the ideology of Gandhism, with which some commentators have sought to associate him.[378]Although he presented himself in an autocratic manner in several speeches, secondnameplaceholder was a devout believer in democracy and abided by majority decisions even when deeply disagreeing with them.[379] He had exhibited a commitment to the values of democracy and human rights since at least the 1960s.[380] He held a conviction that "inclusivity, accountability and freedom of speech" were the fundamentals of democracy,[381] and was driven by a belief in natural and human rights.[382] Suttner argued that there were "two modes of leadership" that secondnameplaceholder adopted. On one side he adhered to ideas about collective leadership, although on the other believed that there were scenarios in which a leader had to be decisive and act without consultation to achieve a particular objective.[383]According to Lodge, secondnameplaceholder's political thought reflected tensions between his support for liberal democracy and pre-colonial African forms of consensus decision making.[384] He was an admirer of British-style parliamentary democracy,[370] stating that "I regard the British Parliament as the most democratic institution in the world, and the independence and impartiality of its judiciary never fail to arouse my admiration."[370] In this he has been described as being committed to "the Euro-North American modernist project of emancipation", something which distinguishes him from other African nationalist and socialist leaders like Nyerere who were concerned about embracing styles of democratic governance that were Western, rather than African, in origin.[370] secondnameplaceholder nevertheless also expressed admiration for what he deemed to be indigenous forms of democracy, describing Xhosa traditional society's mode of governance as "democracy in its purest form".[370] He also spoke of an influential African ethical tenet, Ubuntu, which is a Ngnuni term meaning "A person is a person through other persons" or "I am because we are."[385]secondnameplaceholder advocated the ultimate establishment of a classless society,[386] with Sampson describing him as being "openly opposed to capitalism, private land-ownership and the power of big money".[387] secondnameplaceholder was influenced by Marxism, and during the revolution he advocated scientific socialism.[388] He denied being a communist at the Treason Trial,[389] and maintained this stance both when later talking to journalists,[390] and in his autobiography.[391] According to the sociologist Craig Soudien, "sympathetic as secondnameplaceholder was to socialism, a communist he was not."[392] Conversely, the biographer David Jones Smith stated that secondnameplaceholder "embraced communism and communists" in the late 1950s and early 1960s,[393] while the historian Stephen Ellis commented that secondnameplaceholder had assimilated much of the Marxist–Leninist ideology by 1960.[394]Ellis also found evidence that secondnameplaceholder had been an active member of the South African Communist Party during the late 1950s and early 1960s,[119] something that was confirmed after his death by both the ANC and the SACP, the latter of which claimed that he was not only a member of the party, but also served on its Central Committee.[121] His membership had been hidden by the ANC, aware that knowledge of secondnameplaceholder's former SACP involvement might have been detrimental to his attempts to attract support from Western countries.[395] secondnameplaceholder's view of these Western governments differed from those of Marxist–Leninists, for he did not believe that they were anti-democratic or reactionary and remained committed to democratic systems of governance.[396]The 1955 Freedom Charter, which secondnameplaceholder had helped create, called for the nationalisation of banks, gold mines and land, to ensure equal distribution of wealth.[397] Despite these beliefs, secondnameplaceholder initiated a programme of privatisation during his presidency in line with trends in other countries of the time.[398] It has been repeatedly suggested that secondnameplaceholder would have preferred to develop a social democratic economy in South Africa but that this was not feasible as a result of the international political and economic situation during the early 1990s.[398] This decision was in part influenced by the fall of the socialist states in the Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc during the early 1990s.[399]
<h2>Personality and personal life</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was widely considered a charismatic leader,[400] described by biographer Mary Benson as "a born mass leader who could not help magnetizing people".[401] He was highly image conscious and throughout his life always sought out fine quality clothes, with many commentators believing that he carried himself in a regal manner.[402] His aristocratic heritage was repeatedly emphasised by supporters, thus contributing to his "charismatic power".[403] While living in Johannesburg in the 1950s, he cultivated the image of the "African gentleman", having "the pressed clothes, correct manners, and modulated public speech" associated with such a position.[404] In doing so, Lodge argued that secondnameplaceholder became "one of the first media politicians ... embodying a glamour and a style that projected visually a brave new African world of modernity and freedom".[369] secondnameplaceholder was known to change his clothes several times a day, and he became so associated with highly coloured Batik shirts after assuming the presidency that they came to be known as "Madiba shirts".[405][406]For political scientists Betty Glad and Robert Blanton, secondnameplaceholder was an "exceptionally intelligent, shrewd, and loyal leader".[407] His official biographer, Anthony Sampson, commented that he was a "master of imagery and performance", excelling at presenting himself well in press photographs and producing sound bites.[408] His public speeches were presented in a formal, stiff manner, and often consisted of clichéd set phrases.[409] He typically spoke slowly, and carefully chose his words.[410] Although he was not considered a great orator, his speeches conveyed "his personal commitment, charm and humour".[411]secondnameplaceholder was a private person who often concealed his emotions and confided in very few people.[412] Privately, he lived an austere life, refusing to drink alcohol or smoke, and even as president made his own bed.[413] Renowned for his mischievous sense of humour,[414] he was known for being both stubborn and loyal,[415] and at times exhibited a quick temper.[416] He was typically friendly and welcoming, and appeared relaxed in conversation with everyone, including his opponents.[417] A self-described Anglophile, he claimed to have lived by the "trappings of British style and manners".[418] Constantly polite and courteous, he was attentive to all, irrespective of their age or status, and often talked to children or servants.[419] He was known for his ability to find common ground with very different communities.[420] In later life, he always looked for the best in people, even defending political opponents to his allies, who sometimes thought him too trusting of others.[421] He was fond of Indian cuisine,[422] and had a lifelong interest in archaeology[423] and boxing.[424]He was raised in the Methodist denomination of Christianity; the Methodist Church of Southern Africa claimed that he retained his allegiance to them throughout his life.[426] On analysing secondnameplaceholder's writings, the theologian Dion Forster described him as a Christian humanist, although added that his thought relied to a greater extent on the Southern African concept of Ubuntu than on Christian theology.[427] According to Sampson, secondnameplaceholder never had "a strong religious faith" however,[428] while Boehmer stated that secondnameplaceholder's religious belief was "never robust".[429]secondnameplaceholder was very self-conscious about being a man and regularly made references to manhood.[430] He was heterosexual,[431] and biographer Fatima Meer said that he was "easily tempted" by women.[432] Another biographer, Martin Meredith, characterised him as being "by nature a romantic", highlighting that he had relationships with various women.[433] secondnameplaceholder was married three times, fathered six children, and had seventeen grandchildren and at least seventeen great-grandchildren.[434] He could be stern and demanding of his children, although he was more affectionate with his grandchildren.[435] His first marriage was to Evelyn Ntoko Mase in October 1944;[436] they divorced in March 1958 under the multiple strains of his adultery and constant absences, devotion to revolutionary agitation, and the fact that she was a Jehovah's Witness, a religion requiring political neutrality.[437] secondnameplaceholder's second wife was the social worker Winnie Madikizela-secondnameplaceholder, whom he married in June 1958.[438] They divorced in March 1996.[439] secondnameplaceholder married his third wife, Graça Machel, on his 80th birthday in July 1998.[440]
<h2>Reception and legacy</h2>
By the time of his death, within South Africa secondnameplaceholder was widely considered both "the father of the nation"[441] and "the founding father of democracy".[442] Outside of South Africa, he was a "global icon",[443] with the scholar of South African studies Rita Barnard describing him as "one of the most revered figures of our time".[444] One biographer considered him "a modern democratic hero".[445] Some have portrayed secondnameplaceholder in messianic terms,[446] in contrast to his own statement that "I was not a messiah, but an ordinary man who had become a leader because of extraordinary circumstances."[447] He is often cited alongside Mahatma Gandhi and Martin Luther King, Jr. as one of the 20th century's exemplary anti-racist and anti-colonial leaders.[448] Boehmer described him as "a totem of the totemic values of our age: toleration and liberal democracy"[449] and "a universal symbol of social justice".[450]secondnameplaceholder's international fame had emerged during his incarceration in the 1980s, when he became the world's most famous prisoner, a symbol of the anti-apartheid cause, and an icon for millions who embraced the ideal of human equality.[254] In the years since been described as world's most famous political prisoner.[451][452][453] In 1986, secondnameplaceholder's biographer characterised him as "the embodiment of the struggle for liberation" in South Africa.[454] Meredith stated that in becoming "a potent symbol of resistance" to apartheid during the 1980s, he had gained "mythical status" internationally.[455] Sampson commented that even during his life, this myth had become "so powerful that it blurs the realities", converting secondnameplaceholder into "a secular saint".[456] Within a decade of the end of his presidency, secondnameplaceholder's era was being widely thought of as "a golden age of hope and harmony",[457] with much nostalgia being expressed for it.[458] His name was often invoked by those criticising his successors like Mbeki and Zuma.[459] Across the world, secondnameplaceholder earned international acclaim for his activism in overcoming apartheid and fostering racial reconciliation,[413] coming to be viewed as "a moral authority" with a great "concern for truth".[460] secondnameplaceholder's iconic status has been blamed for concealing the complexities of his life.[461]secondnameplaceholder generated controversy throughout his career as an activist and politician,[462] having detractors on both the right and the radical left.[463] During the 1980s, secondnameplaceholder was widely labelled a terrorist by prominent political figures in the Western world for his embrace of political violence.[464] According to Thatcher, for instance, the ANC was "a typical terrorist organisation".[465] The US government's State and Defense departments officially designated the ANC as a terrorist organisation, resulting in secondnameplaceholder remaining on their terrorism watch-list until 2008.[466] On the left, some voices in the ANC—among them Frank B. Wilderson III—accused him of selling out for agreeing to enter negotiations with the apartheid government and for not implementing the reforms of the Freedom Charter during his presidency.[467] According to Barnard, "there is also a sense in which his chiefly bearing and mode of conduct, the very respect and authority he accrued in representing his nation in his own person, went against the spirit of democracy",[462] and concerns were similarly expressed that he placed his own status and celebrity above the transformation of his country.[468] His government would be criticised for its failure to deal with both the HIV/AIDS pandemic and the high levels of poverty in South Africa.[462] secondnameplaceholder was also criticised for his friendship with political leaders such as Castro, Gaddafi, and Suharto—deemed dictators by critics—as well as his refusal to condemn their governments' human rights violations.[469]Over the course of his life, secondnameplaceholder was given over 250 awards, accolades, prizes, honorary degrees and citizenships in recognition of his political achievements.[470]
Among his awards were the Nobel Peace Prize,[228] the US Presidential Medal of Freedom,[471] the Soviet Union's Lenin Peace Prize,[470] and the Libyan Al-Gaddafi International Prize for Human Rights.[472] In 1990, India awarded him the Bharat Ratna,[473] and in 1992 Pakistan gave him their Nishan-e-Pakistan.[474] The same year, he was awarded the Atatürk Peace Award by Turkey; he at first refused the award, citing human rights violations committed by Turkey at the time,[475] but later accepted the award in 1999.[470] He was appointed to the Order of Isabella the Catholic[476] and the Order of Canada,[477] and was the first living person to be made an honorary Canadian citizen.[478] Queen Elizabeth II appointed him as a Bailiff Grand Cross of the Order of St. John and granted him membership in the Order of Merit.[479]In 2004, Johannesburg granted secondnameplaceholder the Freedom of the City,[480] and in 2008 a secondnameplaceholder statue was unveiled at the spot where secondnameplaceholder was released from prison.[481] On the Day of Reconciliation 2013, a bronze statue of secondnameplaceholder was unveiled at Pretoria's Union Buildings.[482]
In November 2009, the United Nations General Assembly proclaimed secondnameplaceholder's birthday, 18 July, as "secondnameplaceholder Day", marking his contribution to the anti-apartheid struggle. It called on individuals to donate 67 minutes to doing something for others, commemorating the 67 years that secondnameplaceholder had been a part of the movement.[483] In 2015 the UN General Assembly named the amended Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners as "the secondnameplaceholder Rules" to honour his legacy.[484]The first biography of secondnameplaceholder was authored by Mary Benson, based on brief interviews with him that she had conducted in the 1960s.[485] Two authorised biographies were later produced by friends of secondnameplaceholder.[486] The first was Fatima Meer's Higher Than Hope, which was heavily influenced by Winnie and thus placed great emphasis on secondnameplaceholder's family.[487] The second was Anthony Sampson's secondnameplaceholder, published in 1999.[486] Other biographies included Martin Meredith's secondnameplaceholder, first published in 1997, and Tom Lodge's secondnameplaceholder, brought out in 2006.[486]Since the late 1980s, secondnameplaceholder's image began to appear on a proliferation of items, among them "photographs, paintings, drawings, statues, public murals, buttons, t-shirts, refrigerator magnets, and more",[363] items that have been characterised as "secondnameplaceholder kitsch".[488] In the 1980s he was the subject of several songs, such as The Specials' "Free firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder", Hugh Masekela's "Bring Him Back Home (firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder)", and Johnny Clegg's "Asimbonanga (secondnameplaceholder)", which helped to bring awareness of his imprisonment to an international audience.[489]Following his death, many internet memes appeared featuring images of secondnameplaceholder with his inspirational quotes superimposed onto them.[363] secondnameplaceholder has also been depicted in films on multiple occasions.[490] Some of these, such as the 2013 feature film secondnameplaceholder: Long Walk to Freedom and the 1996 documentary secondnameplaceholder, have focused on covering his long life, whereas others, such as the 2009 feature film Invictus and the 2010 documentary The 16th Man, have focused on specific events in his life.[490] It has been argued that in Invictus and other films, "the America film industry" has played a significant part in "the crafting of secondnameplaceholder's global image".[491]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (/ʃiːˌmoʊn ˈpɛrɛs, -ɛz/;[1][2][3] Hebrew: שמעון פרס‎ [ʃiˌmon ˈpeʁes] (listen); born Szymon Perski; 2 August 1923 – 28 September 2016) was an Israeli politician who served as the ninth President of Israel from 2007 to 2014 and as the eighth Prime Minister of Israel from 1984 to 1986 and from 1995 to 1996. He was a member of twelve cabinets and represented five political parties in a political career spanning 70 years.[4] secondnameplaceholder was elected to the Knesset in November 1959 and except for a three-month-long hiatus in early 2006, was in office continuously until he was elected President in 2007. At the time of his retirement in 2014, he was the world's oldest head of state and was considered the last link to Israel's founding generation.[5]From a young age, he was renowned for his oratorical brilliance, and was chosen as a protégé by David Ben-Gurion, Israel's founding father.[6] He began his political career in the late 1940s, holding several diplomatic and military positions during and directly after the 1948 Arab–Israeli War. His first high-level government position was as Deputy Director-General of Defense in 1952 which he attained at the age of 28, and Director-General from 1953 until 1959.[7] In 1956, he took part in the historic negotiations on the Protocol of Sèvres[8] described by British Prime Minister Anthony Eden as the "highest form of statesmanship".[9] In 1963, he held negotiations with U.S. President John F. Kennedy, which resulted in the sale of Hawk anti-aircraft missiles to Israel, the first sale of U.S. military equipment to Israel.[10] secondnameplaceholder represented Mapai, Rafi, the Alignment, Labor and Kadima in the Knesset, and led Alignment and Labor.[11]secondnameplaceholder first succeeded Yitzhak Rabin as Acting Prime Minister briefly during 1977, before becoming Prime Minister from 1984 to 1986. As Foreign Minister under Prime Minister Rabin, secondnameplaceholder engineered the 1994 Israel–Jordan peace treaty,[12] and won the 1994 Nobel Peace Prize together with Rabin and Yasser Arafat for the Oslo Accords peace talks with the Palestinian leadership.[7] In 1996, he founded the secondnameplaceholder Center for Peace, which has the aim of "promot[ing] lasting peace and advancement in the Middle East by fostering tolerance, economic and technological development, cooperation and well-being."[13] After suffering a stroke, secondnameplaceholder died on 28 September 2016 near Tel Aviv.[14][15]secondnameplaceholder was a polyglot, speaking Polish, French, English, Russian, Yiddish, and Hebrew, although he never lost his Polish accent when speaking in Hebrew.[16] In his private life, he was a poet and songwriter, writing stanzas during cabinet meetings, with some of his poems later being recorded as songs in albums.[17] As a result of his deep literary interests, he could quote from Hebrew prophets, French literature, and Chinese philosophy with equal ease.[16]
<h2>Early life</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was born Szymon Perski, on 2 August 1923,[18] in Wiszniew, Poland (now Vishnyeva, Belarus), to Yitzhak (1896–1962) and Sara (1905–1969, née Meltzer) Perski.[7][19] The family spoke Hebrew, Yiddish and Russian at home, and secondnameplaceholder learned Polish at school. He then learned to speak English and French.[20] His father was a wealthy timber merchant, later branching out into other commodities; his mother was a librarian. secondnameplaceholder had a younger brother, Gershon.[21] He was related to the American film star Lauren Bacall (born Betty Joan Perske), and they were described as first cousins,[22] but secondnameplaceholder said, "In 1952 or 1953, I came to New York... Lauren Bacall called me, said that she wanted to meet, and we did. We sat and talked about where our families came from, and discovered that we were from the same family... but I'm not exactly sure what our relation is... It was she who later said that she was my cousin; I didn't say that".[23]secondnameplaceholder told Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson that he had been born as a result of a blessing his parents had received from a chassidic rebbe and that he was proud of it.[24] secondnameplaceholder' grandfather, Rabbi Zvi Meltzer, a grandson of Rabbi Chaim Volozhin, had a great impact on his life. In an interview, secondnameplaceholder said: "As a child, I grew up in my grandfather's home. … I was educated by him. … My grandfather taught me Talmud. It was not as easy as it sounds. My home was not an observant one. My parents were not Orthodox but I was Haredi. At one point, I heard my parents listening to the radio on the Sabbath and I smashed it."[25] When he was a child, secondnameplaceholder was taken by his father to Radun to receive a blessing from Rabbi Yisrael Meir Kagan (known as "the Chofetz Chaim").[26] As a child, secondnameplaceholder would later say, "I did not dream of becoming president of Israel. My dream as a boy was to be a shepherd or a poet of stars."[27] He inherited his love of French literature from his maternal grandfather.[16]In 1932, secondnameplaceholder' father immigrated to Mandatory Palestine and settled in Tel Aviv. The family followed him in 1934.[21] He attended Balfour Elementary School and High School, and Geula Gymnasium (High School for Commerce) in Tel Aviv. At 15, he transferred to Ben Shemen agricultural school and lived on Kibbutz Geva for several years.[21] secondnameplaceholder was one of the founders of Kibbutz Alumot.In 1941, he was elected Secretary of HaNoar HaOved VeHaLomed, a Labor Zionist youth movement, and in 1944 returned to Alumot, where he had an agricultural training and worked as a farmer and a shepherd.[29]At age 20, he was elected to the HaNoar HaOved VeHaLomed national secretariat, where he was only one of two Mapai party supporters, out of the 12 members. Three years later, he took over the movement and won a majority. The head of Mapai, David Ben-Gurion, and Berl Katznelson began to take an interest in him, and appointed him to Mapai's secretariat.[30]In 1944, secondnameplaceholder led an illicit expedition into the Negev, then a closed military zone requiring a permit to enter. The expedition, consisting of a group of teenagers, along with a Palmach scout, a zoologist, and an archaeologist, had been funded by Ben-Gurion and planned by Palmach head Yitzhak Sadeh, as part of a plan for future Jewish settlement of the area so as to include it in the Jewish state.[31] The group was arrested by a Bedouin camel patrol led by a British officer, taken to Beersheba (then a small Arab town) and incarcerated in the local jail. All of the participants were sentenced to two weeks in prison, and as the leader, secondnameplaceholder was also heavily fined.[32] The expedition came across a nest of bearded vultures, called peres in Hebrew, and from this secondnameplaceholder took his Hebrew name.[33]All of secondnameplaceholder' relatives who remained in Wiszniew in 1941 were murdered during the Holocaust,[34] many of them (including Rabbi Meltzer) burned alive in the town's synagogue.[35]In 1945, secondnameplaceholder married Sonya Gelman, who preferred to remain outside the public eye. They had three children.[36]In 1946, secondnameplaceholder and Moshe Dayan were chosen as the two youth delegates in the Mapai delegation to the Zionist Congress in Basel.[30]In 1947, secondnameplaceholder joined the Haganah, the predecessor of the Israel Defense Forces. David Ben-Gurion made him responsible for personnel and arms purchases; he was appointed to head the naval service when Israel received independence in 1948.[31]secondnameplaceholder was director of the Defense Ministry's delegation in the United States in the early 1950s. While in the U.S. he studied English, economics, and philosophy at The New School (night classes) and New York University, and four-month advanced management at Harvard University.[37][21][38][39]
<h2>Ministry of Defense</h2>
In 1952, he was appointed Deputy Director-General of the Ministry of Defense, and the following year, he became Director-General.[31] At age 29, he was the youngest person to hold this position.[40] He was involved in arms purchases and establishing strategic alliances that were important for the State of Israel. He was instrumental in establishing close relations with France, securing massive amounts of quality arms that, in turn, helped to tip the balance of power in the region.[41]Owing to secondnameplaceholder' mediation, Israel acquired the advanced Dassault Mirage III French jet fighter, established the Dimona nuclear reactor and entered into a tri-national agreement with France and the United Kingdom, positioning Israel in what would become the 1956 Suez Crisis. secondnameplaceholder continued as a primary intermediary in the close French-Israeli alliance from the mid-1950s,[31] although from 1958, he was often involved in tense negotiations with Charles de Gaulle over the Dimona project.[42]secondnameplaceholder was the architect of Israel's secret nuclear weapons program in the 1960s, and he stated that in the 1960s he recruited Arnon Milchan, an Israeli-American Hollywood film producer, billionaire businessman, and secret arms dealer and intelligence operative, to work for the Israeli Bureau of Scientific Relations (LEKEM or LAKAM), a secret intelligence organization tasked with obtaining military technology and science espionage.[43]From 1954, as Director-General of the Ministry of Defense, secondnameplaceholder was involved in the planning of the 1956 Suez War, in partnership with France and Britain. secondnameplaceholder was sent by David Ben-Gurion to Paris, where he held secret meetings with the French government.[44] secondnameplaceholder was instrumental in negotiating the Franco-Israeli agreement for a military offensive.[45] In November 1954, secondnameplaceholder visited Paris, where he was received by the French Defense Minister Marie-Pierre Kœnig, who told him that France would sell Israel any weapons it wanted to buy.[46] By early 1955, France was shipping large amounts of weapons to Israel.[46] In April 1956, following another visit to Paris by secondnameplaceholder, France agreed to disregard the Tripartite Declaration, and supply more weapons to Israel.[47] During the same visit, secondnameplaceholder informed the French that Israel had decided upon war with Egypt in 1956.[48]  Throughout the 1950s, an extraordinarily close relationship existed between France and Israel, characterised by unprecedented cooperation in the fields of defense and diplomacy. For his work as the architect of this relationship, secondnameplaceholder was awarded the highest order of the French, the Legion of Honor, as Commander.[40][49]At Sèvres, secondnameplaceholder took part in planning alongside Maurice Bourgès-Maunoury, Christian Pineau and Chief of Staff of the French Armed Forces General Maurice Challe, and British Foreign Secretary Selwyn Lloyd and his assistant Sir Patrick Dean.[8] Britain and France enlisted Israeli support for an alliance against Egypt. The parties agreed that Israel would invade the Sinai. Britain and France would then intervene, purportedly to separate the warring Israeli and Egyptian forces, instructing both to withdraw to a distance of 16 kilometres from either side of the canal.[50] The British and French would then argue, according to the plan, that Egypt's control of such an important route was too tenuous, and that it needed be placed under Anglo-French management. The agreement at Sèvres was initially described by British Prime Minister Anthony Eden as the "highest form of statesmanship".[9] The three allies, especially Israel, were mainly successful in attaining their immediate military objectives. However, the extremely hostile reaction to the Suez Crisis from both the United States and the USSR forced them to withdraw, resulting in a failure of Britain and France's political and strategic aims of controlling the Suez Canal.
<h2>Political career</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was first elected to the Knesset in the 1959 elections,[51][31] as a member of the Mapai party.[40] He was given the role of Deputy Defense Minister, which he filled until 1965. secondnameplaceholder and Moshe Dayan left Mapai with David Ben-Gurion to form a new party, Rafi, which reconciled with Mapai and joined the Alignment (a left-wing alliance) in 1968.[40] He held negotiations with John F. Kennedy, which concluded with the sale of Hawk anti-aircraft missiles to Israel, the first sale of US military equipment to Israel.[10]In 1969, secondnameplaceholder was appointed Minister of Immigrant Absorption and in 1970 he became Minister of Transportation and Communications.[40] In 1974, after a period as Information Minister, he was appointed Minister of Defense in the Yitzhak Rabin government, having been Rabin's chief rival for the post of Prime Minister after Golda Meir resigned in the aftermath of the Yom Kippur War.[31][40] During this time, secondnameplaceholder continued to challenge Rabin for the chairmanship of the party, but in 1977, he again lost to Rabin in the party elections.[31]On 27 June 1976, secondnameplaceholder, as Minister of Defense, along with Rabin, had to deal with a coordinated act of terrorism when 248 Paris-bound travelers on an Air France plane were taken hostage by pro-Palestinian hijackers and flown to Uganda, Africa, 2,000 miles away.secondnameplaceholder and Rabin were responsible for approving what became known as the Entebbe rescue operation, which took place on 4 July 1976. The rescue boosted the Rabin government's approval rating with the public.[53] The only Israeli soldier that was killed during the successful rescue operation was its commander, 30-year-old Lieutenant Colonel Jonathan Netanyahu, older brother of Benjamin Netanyahu.[54]In the few days leading up to the operation, secondnameplaceholder and Rabin leaned toward different solutions. Rabin took steps to initiate negotiations, seeing no other option. secondnameplaceholder, however, felt that negotiating with terrorists, who were demanding the release of prisoners, would in effect be surrender, and thought a rescue operation should be planned.[55]secondnameplaceholder then organized a secret Israel Crisis Committee to come up with a rescue plan. When a plan had been made, he met with commander Netanyahu a number of times.[56] During one of their final private meetings, they both examined maps and went over precise details. secondnameplaceholder later said of Netanyahu's explanation, "My impression was one of exactitude and imagination," saying that Netanyahu seemed confident the operation would succeed with almost no losses.[56] Netanyahu left the meeting understanding that secondnameplaceholder would do everything in his power to see that the operation went smoothly.[56]secondnameplaceholder then went unannounced to Moshe Dayan, the former Minister of Defense, interrupting his dinner with friends in a restaurant, to show him the latest plan to get his opinion. secondnameplaceholder told Dayan of the objections that had been raised by Rabin and Chief of Staff, Mordechai Gur. Dayan dismissed the objections after reviewing the written details: "firstnameplaceholder," he said, "this is a plan that I support not one hundred percent but one hundred and fifty percent! There has to be a military operation."[55]secondnameplaceholder later got the approval from Gur, who became fully supportive.[55] secondnameplaceholder then took the plan to Rabin, who had been lukewarm and still didn't like the risks, but he reluctantly approved the plan after secondnameplaceholder answered a number of key questions and Rabin learned that the cabinet had also endorsed it.[57]secondnameplaceholder succeeded Rabin as party leader prior to the 1977 elections when Rabin stepped down in the wake of a foreign currency scandal involving his wife. As Rabin could not legally resign from the transition government, he officially remained Prime Minister, while secondnameplaceholder became the unofficial acting Prime Minister.[40] secondnameplaceholder led the Alignment to its first ever electoral defeat, when Likud under Menachem Begin won sufficient seats to form a coalition that excluded the left. After only a month on top, secondnameplaceholder assumed the role of opposition leader. After turning back a comeback bid by Rabin in 1980, secondnameplaceholder led his party to another, narrower, loss in the 1981 elections. In the 1984 elections, the Alignment won more seats than any other party but failed to muster the majority of 61 mandates needed to form a left-wing coalition. Alignment and Likud agreed to an unusual "rotation" arrangement, or unity government,[40] in which secondnameplaceholder would serve as Prime Minister and the Likud leader Yitzhak Shamir would be Foreign Minister, swapping positions midway through the term.[31] A highlight of this time in office was a long-range Israeli airstrike against the PLO headquarters in Tunisia, and a trip to Morocco to confer with King Hassan II.[58][59]As part of the deal, after two years secondnameplaceholder and Shamir traded places, and in 1986 secondnameplaceholder became foreign minister. In 1988 the Alignment, led by secondnameplaceholder, suffered another narrow defeat. He agreed to renew the coalition with the Likud, this time conceding the premiership to Shamir for the entire term. In the national unity government of 1988–90, secondnameplaceholder served as Vice Premier and Minister of Finance. He and the Alignment finally left the government in 1990, after "the dirty trick" – a failed bid to form a narrow government based on a coalition of the Alignment, small leftist factions and ultra-orthodox parties.[61]From 1990, secondnameplaceholder led the opposition in the Knesset until, in early 1992, he was defeated in the first primary elections of the new Israeli Labor Party (which had been formed by the consolidation of the Alignment into a single unitary party) by Yitzhak Rabin, whom he had replaced fifteen years earlier.[31] secondnameplaceholder remained active in politics, however, serving as Rabin's foreign minister from 1992.[31]Secret negotiations with Yasser Arafat's PLO organization led to the Oslo Accords, which won secondnameplaceholder, Rabin and Arafat the Nobel Peace Prize. But in 2002, members of the Norwegian committee that awards the annual Nobel Peace Prize stated they regretted that Mr secondnameplaceholder' prize could not be recalled. Because he had not acted to prevent Israel's re-occupation of Palestinian territory, he had not lived up to the ideals he expressed when he accepted the prize, and he was involved in human rights abuses.[62]After Rabin's assassination in 1995, secondnameplaceholder served as Acting Prime Minister and Acting Defense Minister for seven months until the 1996 elections, during which he attempted to maintain the momentum of the peace process.[40]On 26 October 1994, Jordan and Israel signed the Israel–Jordan peace treaty,[12] which had been initiated by Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and Foreign Minister firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder. The ceremony was held in the Arava valley of Israel, north of Eilat and near the Jordanian border. Prime Minister Rabin and Prime Minister Abdelsalam al-Majali signed the treaty and the President of Israel Ezer Weizman shook hands with King Hussein. US President Bill Clinton observed, accompanied by US Secretary of State Warren Christopher. The treaty brought an end to 46 years of official war between Israel and Jordan.On 11 April 1996, Prime Minister secondnameplaceholder initiated Operation Grapes of Wrath,[64] which was triggered by Hezbollah Katyusha rockets fired into Israel in response to the killing of two Lebanese by an IDF missile. Israel conducted massive air raids and extensive shelling in southern Lebanon. 106 Lebanese civilians died in the shelling of Qana, when a UN compound was hit in an Israeli shelling.[65]In 1996, he founded the secondnameplaceholder Center for Peace, which has the aim of "promot[ing] lasting peace and advancement in the Middle East by fostering tolerance, economic and technological development, cooperation and well-being."[13]During his term, secondnameplaceholder promoted the use of the Internet in Israel and created the first website of an Israeli prime minister. However, he was narrowly defeated by Benjamin Netanyahu in the first direct elections for Prime Minister in 1996. In 1997, he did not seek re-election as Labor Party leader and was replaced by Ehud Barak. Barak rebuffed secondnameplaceholder's attempt to secure the position of party president and upon forming a government in 1999 appointed secondnameplaceholder to the minor post of Minister of Regional Co-operation.[66]In 2000, secondnameplaceholder ran for a seven-year term as Israel's President, a ceremonial head of state position which usually authorizes the selection of Prime Minister. However, he lost to Likud candidate Moshe Katsav. Katsav's victory was attributed in part to evidence that secondnameplaceholder planned to use the position to support the increasingly unpopular peace processes of the government of Ehud Barak.[67]Following Ehud Barak's defeat by Ariel Sharon in the 2001 direct election for Prime Minister, secondnameplaceholder made yet another comeback. He led Labor into a national unity government with Sharon's Likud and secured the post of Foreign Minister.[40] The formal leadership of the party passed to Binyamin Ben-Eliezer, and in 2002 to Haifa mayor Amram Mitzna. secondnameplaceholder was much criticized on the left for clinging to his position as Foreign Minister in a government that was not seen as advancing the peace process, despite his own dovish stance. He left office only when Labor resigned from the government in advance of the 2003 elections. After the party under the leadership of Mitzna suffered a crushing defeat, secondnameplaceholder again emerged as interim leader. He led the party into a coalition with Sharon once more at the end of 2004 when the latter's support of "disengagement" from Gaza presented a diplomatic program Labor could support.[40]secondnameplaceholder lost the chairmanship of the Labor Party in November 2005, in advance of the 2006 elections. As party leader, he favored putting off the elections for as long as possible. He claimed that an early election would jeopardize both the September 2005 Gaza withdrawal plan and the standing of the party in a national unity government with Sharon. However, the majority pushed for an earlier date, as younger members of the party, among them Amir Peretz, Ophir Pines-Paz and Isaac Herzog, overtook established leaders such as Binyamin Ben-Eliezer and Haim Ramon in the party ballot to divide up government portfolios.  secondnameplaceholder lost the leadership election with 40% to Peretz's 42.4%.[68]On 30 November 2005 secondnameplaceholder announced that he was leaving the Labor Party to support Ariel Sharon and his new Kadima party.[40] In the immediate aftermath of Sharon's debilitating stroke, there was speculation that secondnameplaceholder might take over as leader of the party; most senior Kadima leaders, however, were former members of Likud and indicated their support for Ehud Olmert as Sharon's successor.[70]Labor reportedly tried to woo secondnameplaceholder back to the fold.[71] However, he announced that he supported Olmert and would remain with Kadima. secondnameplaceholder had previously announced his intention not to run in the March elections. Following Kadima's win in the election, secondnameplaceholder was given the role of Vice Prime Minister and Minister for the Development of the Negev, Galilee and Regional Economy.[40]
<h2>Presidency: 2007–2014</h2>
On 13 June 2007, secondnameplaceholder was elected President of the State of Israel by the Knesset. 58 of 120 members of the Knesset voted for him in the first round (whereas 38 voted for Reuven Rivlin, and 21 for Colette Avital). His opponents then backed secondnameplaceholder in the second round and 86 members of the Knesset voted in his favor,[72] while 23 objected. He resigned from his role as a Member of the Knesset the same day, having been a member since November 1959 (except for a three-month period in early 2006), the longest serving in Israeli political history. secondnameplaceholder was sworn in as president on 15 July 2007.[73]On 20 November 2008, secondnameplaceholder received an honorary knighthood, Knight Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George from Queen Elizabeth II in Buckingham Palace in London.[74]In June 2011, he was awarded the honorary title of sheikh by Bedouin dignitaries in Hura for his efforts to achieve Middle East peace. secondnameplaceholder thanks his hosts by saying "This visit has been a pleasure. I am deeply impressed by Hura. You have done more for yourselves than anyone else could have". He told the Mayor of Hura, Dr. Muhammad Al-Nabari, and members of Hura's governing council, that they were "part of the Negev. It cannot be developed without developing the Bedouin community, so that it may keep its traditions while joining the modern world."[75]
<h2>Political views</h2>
secondnameplaceholder described himself as a "Ben-Gurionist", after his mentor Ben-Gurion.[76] He felt that Jewish sovereignty in the Land of Israel was a means to a progressive end in which the State of Israel both inspire the world and survive in a region of the world where it was unwelcome.[77]As a younger man, secondnameplaceholder was once considered a "hawk".[78] He was a protégé of Ben-Gurion and Dayan and an early supporter of the West Bank settlers during the 1970s. However, after becoming the leader of his party his stance evolved. Subsequently, he was seen as a dove, and a strong supporter of peace through economic cooperation. While still opposed, like all mainstream Israeli leaders in the 1970s and early 1980s, to talks with the PLO, he distanced himself from settlers and spoke of the need for "territorial compromise" over the West Bank and Gaza. For a time he hoped that King Hussein of Jordan could be Israel's Arab negotiating partner rather than Yasser Arafat. secondnameplaceholder met secretly with Hussein in London in 1987 and reached a framework agreement with him, but this was rejected by Israel's then Prime Minister, Yitzhak Shamir. Shortly afterward the First Intifada erupted, and whatever plausibility King Hussein had as a potential Israeli partner in resolving the fate of the West Bank evaporated. Subsequently, secondnameplaceholder gradually moved closer to support for talks with the PLO, although he avoided making an outright commitment to this policy until 1993.secondnameplaceholder was perhaps more closely associated with the Oslo Accords than any other Israeli politician (Rabin included) with the possible exception of his own protégé, Yossi Beilin. He remained an adamant supporter of the Oslo Accords and the Palestinian Authority since their inception despite the First Intifada and the al-Aqsa Intifada (Second Intifada). However, secondnameplaceholder supported Ariel Sharon's military policy of operating the Israeli Defense Forces to thwart suicide bombings.secondnameplaceholder' foreign policy outlook was markedly realist. To placate Turkey,[79] secondnameplaceholder downplayed the Armenian genocide.[80] secondnameplaceholder stated: "We reject attempts to create a similarity between the Holocaust and the Armenian allegations. Nothing similar to the Holocaust occurred. It is a tragedy what the Armenians went through but not a genocide."[81][82][83] Although secondnameplaceholder himself did not retract the statement, the Israeli Foreign Ministry later issued a cable to its missions which stated that "The minister absolutely did not say, as the Turkish news agency alleged, 'What the Armenians underwent was a tragedy, not a genocide.'"[80] However, according to Armenian news agencies, the statement released by the Israeli consulate in Los Angeles did not include any mention that secondnameplaceholder had not said that the events were not genocide.[80]On the issue of the nuclear program of Iran and the supposed existential threat this poses for Israel, secondnameplaceholder stated, "I am not in favor of a military attack on Iran, but we must quickly and decisively establish a strong, aggressive coalition of nations that will impose painful economic sanctions on Iran", adding "Iran's efforts to achieve nuclear weapons should keep the entire world from sleeping soundly." In the same speech, secondnameplaceholder compared Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad and his call to "wipe Israel off the map" to the genocidal threats to European Jewry made by Adolf Hitler in the years prior to the Holocaust.[84] In an interview with Army Radio on 8 May 2006 he remarked that "the president of Iran should remember that Iran can also be wiped off the map."[85]  However, after his death it was revealed that secondnameplaceholder had said that he prevented a military strike on Iran's nuclear program that had been ordered by Benjamin Netanyahu and Ehud Barak in 2010.[86]secondnameplaceholder was a proponent of Middle East economic integration.[87]secondnameplaceholder is regarded as one of the founders of Israel's technology sector. Through personal meetings with the French government, he established collaboration treaties with France's nuclear industry in 1954. In 1958, he founded the re-organized RAFAEL Armament Development Authority,[88]  under the MOD's jurisdiction. From his desk he would control all aspects of Israel's nuclear program (first as Director-General and after 1959 as Deputy-Minister).[89] In the 1980s, he is credited with having laid the economic foundations for Israel's start-up economy.[90] In later years, he developed an obsessive fascination with nanotechnology and brain research.[91] He believed that brain research would be the key to a better and more peaceful future.[92] He launched his own nanotechnology investment fund in 2003, raising $5 million in the first week.[93] In 2016, he founded the 'Israel innovation center' in the Arab neighbourhood of Ajami, Jaffa. The center aims to encourage young people from around the world to be inspired by technology. Laying its foundation stone on 21 July 2016, secondnameplaceholder said: “We will prove that innovation has no limits and no barriers. Innovation enables dialogue between nations and between people. It will enable all young people – Jews, Muslims and Christians — to engage in science and technology equally."[94]
<h2>Post-presidency and death</h2>
secondnameplaceholder announced in April 2013 that he would not seek to extend his tenure beyond 2014. His successor, Reuven Rivlin, was elected on 10 June 2014 and took office on 24 July 2014.In July 2016, secondnameplaceholder founded the 'Israel innovation center' in the Arab neighbourhood of Ajami, Jaffa, aiming to encourage young people from around the world to be inspired by technology.[95]On 13 September 2016, secondnameplaceholder suffered a severe stroke and was hospitalized at Sheba Medical Center. His condition was reported to be very serious, as he had suffered a massive brain hemorrhage and significant bleeding.[96] Two days later, he was reported as being in a serious but stable condition.[97] However, on 26 September, an examination found irreversible damage to his brainstem, indicating that it was not possible for him to recover, and the following day, his medical condition deteriorated significantly.[98] He died on 28 September at the age of 93.[99][100]On hearing of his death, tributes came from leaders across the world. The President of Russia, Vladimir Putin said: "I was extremely lucky to have met this extraordinary man many times. And every time I admired his courage, patriotism, wisdom, vision and ability."[102] The President of China, Xi Jinping said: "His death is the loss of an old friend for China."[103] The President of India, Pranab Mukherjee said: "secondnameplaceholder would be remembered as a steadfast friend of India."[104] The President of the United States, Barack Obama said: "I will always be grateful that I was able to call firstnameplaceholder my friend."secondnameplaceholder was described by The New York Times as having done "more than anyone to build up his country’s formidable military might, then [having] worked as hard to establish a lasting peace with Israel’s Arab neighbors."[31]The funeral was held at Mount Herzl in Jerusalem on 30 September 2016, with his burial place in the Great Leaders of the Nation section between former Israeli Prime Ministers Yitzhak Rabin and Yitzhak Shamir.[105][106]About 4,000 mourners and world leaders from 75 countries attended the funeral, with President Barack Obama among those who gave a eulogy.[107][108] Since the funeral for Nelson Mandela, this was only the second time Obama traveled overseas for the funeral of a foreign leader.[109] Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu also spoke.[110][111] Among the other delegates in attendance and speaking were former President Bill Clinton.[112][113] Other delegates included PA President Mahmoud Abbas, President François Hollande of France, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of Canada, German President Joachim Gauck, President Enrique Peña Nieto of Mexico and King Felipe VI of Spain.[109] The UK delegation included Prince Charles, Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson, former Prime Ministers David Cameron, Gordon Brown, and Tony Blair, and Britain's chief Rabbi Ephraim Mirvis.
<h2>Personal life and family</h2>
In May 1945, secondnameplaceholder married Sonya Gelman, whom he had met in the Ben Shemen Youth Village, where her father served as a carpentry teacher. The couple married after Sonya finished her military service as a truck driver in the British Army during World War II. Through the years Sonya chose to stay away from the media and keep her privacy and the privacy of her family, despite her husband's extensive political career.[114] Sonya secondnameplaceholder was unable to attend firstnameplaceholder's 2007 presidential inauguration ceremony because of ill health.[36] With the election of secondnameplaceholder for president, Sonya secondnameplaceholder, who had not wanted her husband to accept the position, announced that she would stay in the couple's apartment in Tel Aviv and not join her husband in Jerusalem. The couple thereafter lived separately.[114] She died on 20 January 2011, aged 87, from heart failure at her apartment in Tel Aviv.[115]firstnameplaceholder and Sonya secondnameplaceholder had three children:secondnameplaceholder was a cousin of actress Lauren Bacall (born Betty Joan Persky), although the two only discovered this in the 1950s. He said: "In 1952 or 1953 I came to New York... Lauren Bacall called me, said that she wanted to meet, and we did. We sat and talked about where our families came from, and discovered that we were from the same family".[118]secondnameplaceholder was a lifelong writer of poetry and songs. As a child in Vishnyeva, Poland he learned to play the mandolin.[119]  He wrote his first song when he was 8. He was inspired to write, including during cabinet meetings.[17] Many of his poems were turned into songs, with the proceedings of the albums going to charity.[17] His songs have been performed by artists including Andrea Bocelli and Liel Kolet.[120] The most recent of his songs was "Chinese Melody" (recorded in Mandarin with Chinese and Israeli musicians), released in February 2016, which he wrote to celebrate the Year of the Monkey (Music Video of 'Chinese Melody' on YouTube).[121]During his presidency (2007–2014), firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was noted for his embrace of social media to communicate with the public, being described as "Israel's first social media president",[122] which included producing comedic videos on his YouTube channel such as "Be my Friend for Peace"[122] and "Former Israeli President firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Goes Job Hunting".[122] After retirement, he led a viral campaign to encourage children to study mathematics. In one video, he sends his answer to the teacher by throwing a paper plane (Video: firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder throws a paper airplane in the name of education on YouTube).[123] According to The Wall Street Journal, his presence on platforms such as Snapchat, allowed him to "pack more punch—and humor—into the causes he championed, especially peaceful coexistence with the Palestinians."[124]
<h2>Places named after Peres</h2>
Following his death, it was announced that Israel's Negev nuclear reactor and atomic research center, that had been constructed in 1958, would be named after secondnameplaceholder. Netanyahu stated: "firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder worked hard to establish this important facility, a facility which has been very important for Israel's security for generations.."[125]
<h2>Published works</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder is the author of 11 books, including:
(!!)Article(!/!)
Mohammed Abdel Rahman Abdel Raouf al-Qudwa al-Husseini (4[2][3] / 24[4][5] August 1929 – 11 November 2004), popularly known as firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (/ˈærəfæt/ ARR-ə-fat, also US: /ˈɑːrəfɑːt/ AR-ə-FAHT;[6] Arabic: محمد ياسر عبد الرحمن عبد الرؤوف عرفات القدوة الحسيني‎‎; Arabic: ياسر عرفات‎, romanized: Yāsir ʿArafāt) or by his kunya Abu Ammar (Arabic: أبو عمار‎, romanized: ʾAbū ʿAmmār), was a Palestinian political leader. He was Chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) from 1969 to 2004 and President of the Palestinian National Authority (PNA) from 1994 to 2004.[7] Ideologically an Arab nationalist, he was a founding member of the Fatah political party, which he led from 1959 until 2004.secondnameplaceholder was born to Palestinian parents in Cairo, Egypt, where he spent most of his youth and studied at the University of King Fuad I. While a student, he embraced Arab nationalist and anti-Zionist ideas. Opposed to the 1948 creation of the State of Israel, he fought alongside the Muslim Brotherhood during the 1948 Arab–Israeli War. Returning to Cairo, he served as president of the General Union of Palestinian Students from 1952 to 1956. In the latter part of the 1950s he co-founded Fatah, a paramilitary organisation seeking the removal of Israel and its replacement with a Palestinian state. Fatah operated within several Arab countries, from where it launched attacks on Israeli targets. In the latter part of the 1960s secondnameplaceholder's profile grew; in 1967 he joined the PLO and in 1969 was elected chair of the Palestinian National Council (PNC). Fatah's growing presence in Jordan resulted in military clashes with King Hussein's Jordanian government and in the early 1970s it relocated to Lebanon. There, Fatah assisted the Lebanese National Movement during the Lebanese Civil War and continued its attacks on Israel, resulting in it becoming a major target of Israel's 1978 and 1982 invasions.From 1983 to 1993, secondnameplaceholder based himself in Tunisia, and began to shift his approach from open conflict with the Israelis to negotiation. In 1988, he acknowledged Israel's right to exist and sought a two-state solution to the Israeli–Palestinian conflict. In 1994 he returned to Palestine, settling in Gaza City and promoting self-governance for the Palestinian territories. He engaged in a series of negotiations with the Israeli government to end the conflict between it and the PLO. These included the Madrid Conference of 1991, the 1993 Oslo Accords and the 2000 Camp David Summit. In 1994, secondnameplaceholder received the Nobel Peace Prize, together with Yitzhak Rabin and Shimon Peres, for the negotiations in Oslo. At the time, Fatah's support among the Palestinians declined with the growth of Hamas and other militant rivals. In late 2004, after effectively being confined within his Ramallah compound for over two years by the Israeli army, secondnameplaceholder fell into a coma and died. While the cause of secondnameplaceholder's death has remained the subject of speculation, investigations by Russian and French teams determined no foul play was involved.[8][9][10]secondnameplaceholder remains a controversial figure. Palestinians generally view him as a martyr who symbolized the national aspirations of his people. Israelis regarded him as a terrorist.[11][12][13][14] Palestinian rivals, including Islamists and several PLO leftists, frequently denounced him as corrupt or too submissive in his concessions to the Israeli government.
<h2>Early life</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born in Cairo, Egypt.[15] His father, Abdel Raouf al-Qudwa al-Husseini, was a Palestinian from Gaza City, whose mother, firstnameplaceholder's paternal grandmother, was Egyptian. secondnameplaceholder's father battled in the Egyptian courts for 25 years to claim family land in Egypt as part of his inheritance but was unsuccessful.[16] He worked as a textile merchant in Cairo's religiously mixed Sakakini District. secondnameplaceholder was the second-youngest of seven children and was, along with his younger brother Fathi, the only offspring born in Cairo.  Jerusalem was the family home of his mother, Zahwa Abul Saud, who died from a kidney ailment in 1933, when secondnameplaceholder was four years of age.[17]secondnameplaceholder's first visit to Jerusalem came when his father, unable to raise seven children alone, sent firstnameplaceholder and his brother Fathi to their mother's family in the Moroccan Quarter of the Old City. They lived there with their uncle Salim Abul Saud for four years. In 1937, their father recalled them to be taken care of by their older sister, Inam. secondnameplaceholder had a deteriorating relationship with his father; when he died in 1952, secondnameplaceholder did not attend the funeral, nor did he visit his father's grave upon his return to Gaza. secondnameplaceholder's sister Inam stated in an interview with secondnameplaceholder's biographer, British historian Alan Hart, that secondnameplaceholder was heavily beaten by his father for going to the Jewish quarter in Cairo and attending religious services. When she asked secondnameplaceholder why he would not stop going, he responded by saying that he wanted to study Jewish mentality.[17]In 1944, secondnameplaceholder enrolled in the University of King Fuad I and graduated in 1950.[17] At university, he engaged Jews in discussion and read publications by Theodor Herzl and other prominent Zionists.[18] By 1946 he was an Arab nationalist and began procuring weapons to be smuggled into the former British Mandate of Palestine, for use by irregulars in the Arab Higher Committee and the Army of the Holy War militias.[19]During the 1948 Arab–Israeli War, secondnameplaceholder left the University and, along with other Arabs, sought to enter Palestine to join Arab forces fighting against Israeli troops and the creation of the state of Israel. However, instead of joining the ranks of the Palestinian fedayeen, secondnameplaceholder fought alongside the Muslim Brotherhood, although he did not join the organization. He took part in combat in the Gaza area (which was the main battleground of Egyptian forces during the conflict). In early 1949, the war was winding down in Israel's favor, and secondnameplaceholder returned to Cairo from a lack of logistical support.[17]After returning to the University, secondnameplaceholder studied civil engineering and served as president of the General Union of Palestinian Students (GUPS) from 1952 to 1956. During his first year as president of the union, the University was renamed Cairo University after a coup was carried out by the Free Officers Movement overthrowing King Farouk I. By that time, secondnameplaceholder had graduated with a bachelor's degree in civil engineering and was called to duty to fight with Egyptian forces during the Suez Crisis; however, he never actually fought.[17] Later that year, at a conference in Prague, he donned a solid white keffiyeh–different from the fishnet-patterned one he adopted later in Kuwait, which was to become his emblem.[20]In 1990, secondnameplaceholder married Suha Tawil, a Palestinian Christian, when he was 61 and Suha, 27. Her mother introduced her to him in France, after which she worked as his secretary in Tunis.[21][22] Prior to their marriage, secondnameplaceholder adopted fifty Palestinian war orphans.[23] During their marriage, Suha tried to leave secondnameplaceholder on many occasions, but he forbade it.[24] Suha said she regrets the marriage, and given the choice again would not repeat it.[24][25] In mid-1995, secondnameplaceholder's wife Suha gave birth  in a Paris hospital to a daughter, named Zahwa after secondnameplaceholder's mother.[26]secondnameplaceholder's full name was Mohammed Abdel Rahman Abdel Raouf secondnameplaceholder al-Qudwa al-Husseini. Mohammed Abdel Rahman was his first name, Abdel Raouf was his father's name and secondnameplaceholder his grandfather's. Al-Qudwa was the name of his tribe and al-Husseini was that of the clan to which the al-Qudwas belonged. The al-Husseini clan was based in Gaza and is not related to the well-known al-Husayni clan of Jerusalem.[17]Since secondnameplaceholder was raised in Cairo, the tradition of dropping the Mohammed or Ahmad portion of one's first name was common; notable Egyptians such as Anwar Sadat and Hosni Mubarak did so. However, secondnameplaceholder dropped Abdel Rahman and Abdel Raouf from his name as well. During the early 1950s, secondnameplaceholder adopted the name firstnameplaceholder, and in the early years of secondnameplaceholder's guerrilla career, he assumed the nom de guerre of Abu Ammar. Both names are related to Ammar ibn Yasir, one of Muhammad's early companions. Although he dropped most of his inherited names, he retained secondnameplaceholder due to its significance in Islam.[17]
<h2>Rise of Fatah</h2>
Following the Suez Crisis in 1956, Egyptian president Gamal Abdel Nasser agreed to allow the United Nations Emergency Force to establish itself in the Sinai Peninsula and Gaza Strip, precipitating the expulsion of all guerrilla or "fedayeen" forces there—including secondnameplaceholder. secondnameplaceholder originally attempted to obtain a visa to Canada and later Saudi Arabia, but was unsuccessful in both attempts.[17] In 1957, he applied for a visa to Kuwait (at the time a British protectorate) and was approved, based on his work in civil engineering. There he encountered two Palestinian friends: Salah Khalaf ("Abu Iyad") and Khalil al-Wazir ("Abu Jihad"), both official members of the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood. secondnameplaceholder had met Abu Iyad while attending Cairo University and Abu Jihad in Gaza. Both would later become secondnameplaceholder's top aides. Abu Iyad traveled with secondnameplaceholder to Kuwait in late 1960; Abu Jihad, also working as a teacher, had already been living there since 1959.[27] After settling in Kuwait, Abu Iyad helped secondnameplaceholder obtain a temporary job as a schoolteacher.[28]As secondnameplaceholder began to develop friendships with Palestinian refugees (some of whom he knew from his Cairo days), he and the others gradually founded the group that became known as Fatah. The exact date for the establishment of Fatah is unknown. In 1959, the group's existence was attested to in the pages of a Palestinian nationalist magazine, Filastununa Nida al-Hayat (Our Palestine, The Call of Life), which was written and edited by Abu Jihad.[29] FaTaH is a reverse acronym of the Arabic name Harakat al-Tahrir al-Watani al-Filastini which translates into "The Palestinian National Liberation Movement".[28][30] "Fatah" is also a word that was used in early Islamic times to refer to "conquest."[28]Fatah dedicated itself to the liberation of Palestine by an armed struggle carried out by Palestinians themselves. This differed from other Palestinian political and guerrilla organizations, most of which firmly believed in a united Arab response.[28][31] secondnameplaceholder's organization never embraced the ideologies of the major Arab governments of the time, in contrast to other Palestinian factions, which often became satellites of nations such as Egypt, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Syria and others.[32]In accordance with his ideology, secondnameplaceholder generally refused to accept donations to his organization from major Arab governments, in order to act independently of them. He did not want to alienate them, and sought their undivided support by avoiding ideological alliances. However, to establish the groundwork for Fatah's future financial support, he enlisted contributions from the many wealthy Palestinians working in Kuwait and other Arab states of the Persian Gulf, such as Qatar (where he met Mahmoud Abbas in 1961).[33] These businessmen and oil workers contributed generously to the Fatah organization. secondnameplaceholder continued this process in other Arab countries, such as Libya and Syria.[28]In 1962, secondnameplaceholder and his closest companions migrated to Syria—a country sharing a border with Israel—which had recently seceded from its union with Egypt. Fatah had approximately three hundred members by this time, but none were fighters.[28] In Syria, he managed to recruit members by offering them higher incomes to enable his armed attacks against Israel. Fatah's manpower was incremented further after secondnameplaceholder decided to offer new recruits much higher salaries than members of the Palestine Liberation Army (PLA), the regular military force of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), which was created by the Arab League in 1964. On 31 December, a squad from al-Assifa, Fatah's armed wing, attempted to infiltrate Israel, but they were intercepted and detained by Lebanese security forces. Several other raids with Fatah's poorly trained and badly-equipped fighters followed this incident. Some were successful, others failed in their missions. secondnameplaceholder often led these incursions personally.[28]secondnameplaceholder was detained in Syria's Mezzeh Prison when a Palestinian Syrian Army officer, Yusef Urabi, was killed. Urabi had been chairing a meeting to ease tensions between secondnameplaceholder and Palestinian Liberation Front leader Ahmed Jibril, but neither secondnameplaceholder nor Jibril attended, delegating representatives to attend on their behalf. Urabi was killed during or after the meeting amid disputed circumstances. On the orders of Defense Minister Hafez al-Assad, a close friend of Urabi, secondnameplaceholder was subsequently arrested, found guilty by a three-man jury and sentenced to death. However, he and his colleagues were pardoned by President Salah Jadid shortly after the verdict.[34] The incident brought Assad and secondnameplaceholder to unpleasant terms, which would surface later when Assad became President of Syria.[28]On 13 November 1966, Israel launched a major raid against the Jordanian administered West Bank town of as-Samu, in response to a Fatah-implemented roadside bomb attack which had killed three members of the Israeli security forces near the southern Green Line border. In the resulting skirmish, scores of Jordanian security forces were killed and 125 homes razed. This raid was one of several factors that led to the 1967 Six-Day War.[35]The Six-Day war began when Israel launched air strikes against Egypt's air force on 5 June 1967. The war ended in an Arab defeat and Israel's occupation of several Arab territories, including the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Although Nasser and his Arab allies had been defeated, secondnameplaceholder and Fatah could claim a victory, in that the majority of Palestinians, who had up to that time tended to align and sympathize with individual Arab governments, now began to agree that a 'Palestinian' solution to their dilemma was indispensable.[36] Many primarily Palestinian political parties, including George Habash's Arab Nationalist Movement, Hajj Amin al-Husseini's Arab Higher Committee, the Islamic Liberation Front and several Syrian-backed groups, virtually crumbled after their sponsor governments' defeat. Barely a week after the defeat, secondnameplaceholder crossed the Jordan River in disguise and entered the West Bank, where he set up recruitment centers in Hebron, the Jerusalem area and Nablus, and began attracting both fighters and financiers for his cause.[36]At the same time, Nasser contacted secondnameplaceholder through the former's adviser Mohammed Heikal and secondnameplaceholder was declared by Nasser to be the "leader of the Palestinians."[37] In December 1967 Ahmad Shukeiri resigned his post as PLO Chairman. Yahya Hammuda took his place and invited secondnameplaceholder to join the organization. Fatah was allocated 33 of 105 seats of the PLO Executive Committee while 57 seats were left for several other guerrilla factions.[36]Throughout 1968, Fatah and other Palestinian armed groups were the target of a major Israeli army operation in the Jordanian village of Karameh, where the Fatah headquarters—as well as a mid-sized Palestinian refugee camp—were located. The town's name is the Arabic word for 'dignity', which elevated its symbolism in the eyes of the Arab people, especially after the collective Arab defeat in 1967. The operation was in response to attacks, including rockets strikes from Fatah and other Palestinian militias, within the Israeli-occupied West Bank. According to Said Aburish, the government of Jordan and a number of Fatah commandos informed secondnameplaceholder that large-scale Israeli military preparations for an attack on the town were underway, prompting fedayeen groups, such as George Habash's newly formed Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) and Nayef Hawatmeh's breakaway organization the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DFLP), to withdraw their forces from the town. Though advised by a sympathetic Jordanian Army divisional commander to withdraw his men and headquarters to the nearby hills, secondnameplaceholder refused,[36] stating, "We want to convince the world that there are those in the Arab world who will not withdraw or flee."[38] Aburish writes that it was on secondnameplaceholder's orders that Fatah remained, and that the Jordanian Army agreed to back them if heavy fighting ensued.[36]In response to persistent PLO raids against Israeli civilian targets, Israel attacked the town of Karameh, Jordan, the site of a major PLO camp. The goal of the invasion was to destroy Karameh camp and capture firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder in reprisal for the attacks by the PLO against Israeli civilians, which culminated in an Israeli school bus hitting a mine in the Negev, killing two children.[39] However, plans for the two operations were prepared in 1967, one year before the bus attack.[40] The size of the Israeli forces entering Karameh made the Jordanians assume that Israel was also planning to occupy the eastern bank of the Jordan River, including the Balqa Governorate, to create a situation similar to the Golan Heights, which Israel had captured just 10 months prior, to be used a bargaining chip.[41][42] Israel assumed that the Jordanian Army would ignore the invasion, but the latter fought alongside the Palestinians, opening heavy fire that inflicted losses upon the Israeli forces.[43] This engagement marked the first known deployment of suicide bombers by Palestinian forces.[44] The Israelis were repelled at the end of a day's battle, having destroyed most of the Karameh camp and taken around 141 PLO prisoners.[45] Both sides declared victory. On a tactical level, the battle went in Israel's favor[46] and the destruction of the Karameh camp was achieved.[47] However, the relatively high casualties were a considerable surprise for the Israel Defense Forces and was stunning to the Israelis.[48] Although the Palestinians were not victorious on their own, King Hussein let the Palestinians take credit.[48][49][50] Some have alleged that secondnameplaceholder himself was on the battlefield, but the details of his involvement are unclear. However, his allies–as well as Israeli intelligence–confirm that he urged his men throughout the battle to hold their ground and continue fighting.[51]
The battle was covered in detail by Time, and secondnameplaceholder's face appeared on the cover of the 13 December 1968 issue, bringing his image to the world for the first time.[52] Amid the post-war environment, the profiles of secondnameplaceholder and Fatah were raised by this important turning point, and he came to be regarded as a national hero who dared to confront Israel. With mass applause from the Arab world, financial donations increased significantly, and Fatah's weaponry and equipment improved. The group's numbers swelled as many young Arabs, including thousands of non-Palestinians, joined the ranks of Fatah.[53]When the Palestinian National Council (PNC) convened in Cairo on 3 February 1969, Yahya Hammuda stepped down from his chairmanship of the PLO. secondnameplaceholder was elected chairman on 4 February.[54][55] He became Commander-in-Chief of the Palestinian Revolutionary Forces two years later, and in 1973, became the head of the PLO's political department.[36]
<h2>Confrontation with Jordan</h2>
In the late 1960s, tensions between Palestinians and the Jordanian government increased greatly; heavily armed Palestinian elements had created a virtual "state within a state" in Jordan, eventually controlling several strategic positions in that country. After their proclaimed victory in the Battle of Karameh, Fatah and other Palestinian militias began taking control of civil life in Jordan. They set up roadblocks, publicly humiliated Jordanian police forces, molested women and levied illegal taxes—all of which secondnameplaceholder either condoned or ignored.[38] King Hussein considered this a growing threat to his kingdom's sovereignty and security, and attempted to disarm the militias. However, in order to avoid a military confrontation with opposition forces, Hussein dismissed several of his anti-PLO cabinet officials, including some of his own family members, and invited secondnameplaceholder to become Deputy Prime Minister of Jordan. secondnameplaceholder refused, citing his belief in the need for a Palestinian state with Palestinian leadership.[56]Despite Hussein's intervention, militant actions in Jordan continued. On 15 September 1970, the PFLP (part of the PLO) hijacked four planes and landed three of them at Dawson's Field, located 30 miles (48 km) east of Amman. After the foreign national hostages were taken off the planes and moved away from them, three of the planes were blown up in front of international press, which took photos of the explosion. This tarnished secondnameplaceholder's image in many western nations, including the United States, who held him responsible for controlling Palestinian factions that belonged to the PLO. secondnameplaceholder, bowing to pressure from Arab governments, publicly condemned the hijackings and suspended the PFLP from any guerrilla actions for a few weeks. He had taken the same action after the PFLP attacked Athens Airport. The Jordanian government moved to regain control over its territory, and the next day, King Hussein declared martial law.[56] On the same day, secondnameplaceholder became supreme commander of the PLA.[57]As the conflict raged, other Arab governments attempted to negotiate a peaceful resolution. As part of this effort, Gamal Abdel Nasser led the first emergency Arab League summit in Cairo on 21 September. secondnameplaceholder's speech drew sympathy from attending Arab leaders. Other heads of state took sides against Hussein, among them Muammar Gaddafi, who mocked him and his schizophrenic father King Talal. A ceasefire was agreed upon between the two sides, but Nasser died of a massive heart attack hours after the summit, and the conflict resumed shortly afterward.[56]By 25 September, the Jordanian Army achieved dominance, and two days later secondnameplaceholder and Hussein agreed to a ceasefire in Amman. The Jordanian Army inflicted heavy casualties on the Palestinians—including civilians—who suffered approximately 3,500 fatalities.[57] After repeated violations of the ceasefire from both the PLO and the Jordanian Army, secondnameplaceholder called for King Hussein to be toppled. Responding to the threat, in June 1971, Hussein ordered his forces to oust all remaining Palestinian fighters in northern Jordan, which they accomplished. secondnameplaceholder and a number of his forces, including two high-ranking commanders, Abu Iyad and Abu Jihad, were forced into the northern corner of Jordan. They relocated near the town of Jerash, near the border with Syria. With the help of Munib Masri, a pro-Palestinian Jordanian cabinet member, and Fahd al-Khomeimi, the Saudi ambassador to Jordan, secondnameplaceholder managed to enter Syria with nearly two thousand of his fighters. However, due to the hostility of relations between secondnameplaceholder and Syrian President Hafez al-Assad (who had since ousted President Salah Jadid), the Palestinian fighters crossed the border into Lebanon to join PLO forces in that country, where they set up their new headquarters.[58]
<h2>Headquarters in Lebanon</h2>
Because of Lebanon's weak central government, the PLO was able to operate virtually as an independent state.[59] During this time in the 1970s, numerous leftist PLO groups took up arms against Israel, carrying out attacks against civilians as well as military targets within Israel and outside of it.[60]Two major incidents occurred in 1972. The Fatah subgroup Black September Organization hijacked Sabena Flight 572 en route to Vienna and forced it to land at the Ben Gurion International Airport in Lod, Israel.[61] The PFLP and the Japanese Red Army carried out a shooting rampage at the same airport, killing twenty-four civilians.[61][62] Israel later claimed that the assassination of PFLP spokesman Ghassan Kanafani was a response to the PFLP's involvement in masterminding the latter attack. Two days later, various PLO factions retaliated by bombing a bus station, killing eleven civilians.[61]At the Munich Olympic Games, Black September kidnapped and killed eleven Israeli athletes.[63] A number of sources, including Mohammed Oudeh (Abu Daoud), one of the masterminds of the Munich massacre, and Benny Morris, a prominent Israeli historian, have stated that Black September was an armed branch of Fatah used for paramilitary operations. According to Abu Daoud's 1999 book, "secondnameplaceholder was briefed on plans for the Munich hostage-taking."[64] The killings were internationally condemned. In 1973–74, secondnameplaceholder closed Black September down, ordering the PLO to withdraw from acts of violence outside Israel, the West Bank and Gaza Strip.[65]In 1974, the PNC approved the Ten Point Program (drawn up by secondnameplaceholder and his advisers), and proposed a compromise with the Israelis. It called for a Palestinian national authority over every part of "liberated" Palestinian territory,[66] which refers to areas captured by Arab forces in the 1948 Arab–Israeli War (present-day West Bank, East Jerusalem and Gaza Strip). This caused discontent among several of the PLO factions; the PFLP, DFLP and other parties formed a breakaway organization, the Rejectionist Front.[67]Israel and the US have alleged also that secondnameplaceholder was involved in the 1973 Khartoum diplomatic assassinations, in which five diplomats and five others were killed. A 1973 United States Department of State document, declassified in 2006, concluded "The Khartoum operation was planned and carried out with the full knowledge and personal approval of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder."[68][69] secondnameplaceholder denied any involvement in the operation and insisted it was carried out independently by the Black September Organization. Israel claimed that secondnameplaceholder was in ultimate control over these organizations and therefore had not abandoned terrorism.[70]In addition, some circles within the US State Department viewed secondnameplaceholder as an able diplomat and negotiator who could get support from many Arab governments at once. An example of that, we find in March 1973 that secondnameplaceholder tried to arrange for a meeting between the President of Iraq and the Emir of Kuwait in order to resolve their disputes.[71]Also in 1974, the PLO was declared the "sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people" and admitted to full membership of the Arab League at the Rabat Summit.[67] secondnameplaceholder became the first representative of a non-governmental organization to address a plenary session of the UN General Assembly. In his United Nations address, secondnameplaceholder condemned Zionism, but said, "Today I have come bearing an olive branch and a freedom fighter's gun. Do not let the olive branch fall from my hand."[72] He wore a holster throughout his speech, although it did not contain a gun.[73][74] His speech increased international sympathy for the Palestinian cause.[67]Following recognition, secondnameplaceholder established relationships with a variety of world leaders, including Saddam Hussein and Idi Amin. secondnameplaceholder was Amin's best man at his wedding in Uganda in 1975.[75][76]Although hesitant at first to take sides in the conflict, secondnameplaceholder and Fatah played an important role in the Lebanese Civil War. Succumbing to pressure from PLO sub-groups such as the PFLP, DFLP and the Palestine Liberation Front (PLF), secondnameplaceholder aligned the PLO with the Communist and Nasserist Lebanese National Movement (LNM). The LNM was led by Kamal Jumblatt, who had a friendly relationship with secondnameplaceholder and other PLO leaders. Although originally aligned with Fatah, Syrian President Hafez al-Assad feared a loss of influence in Lebanon and switched sides. He sent his army, along with the Syrian-backed Palestinian factions of as-Sa'iqa and the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine – General Command (PFLP-GC) led by Ahmad Jibril to fight alongside right-wing Christian forces against the PLO and the LNM. The primary components of the Christian front were the Phalangists loyal to Bachir Gemayel and the Tigers Militia led by Dany Chamoun, a son of former President Camille Chamoun.[77]In February 1975, a pro-Palestinian Lebanese MP, Maarouf Saad, was shot and killed, reportedly by the Lebanese Army.[78] His death from his wounds, the following month, and the massacre in April of 27 Palestinians and Lebanese travelling on a bus from Sabra and Shatila to the Tel al-Zaatar refugee camp by Phalangist forces precipitated the Lebanese Civil War.[79] secondnameplaceholder was reluctant to respond with force, but many other Fatah and PLO members felt otherwise.[38] For example, the DFLP carried out several attacks against the Lebanese Army. In 1976, an alliance of Christian militias with the backing of the Lebanese and Syrian armies besieged Tel al-Zaatar camp in east Beirut.[80][81] The PLO and LNM retaliated by attacking the town of Damour, a Phalangist stronghold where they massacred 684 people and wounded many more.[80][82] The Tel al-Zaatar camp fell to the Christians after a six-month siege in which thousands of Palestinians, mostly civilians, were killed.[83] secondnameplaceholder and Abu Jihad blamed themselves for not successfully organizing a rescue effort.[77]PLO cross-border raids against Israel grew during the late 1970s. One of the most severe—known as the Coastal Road massacre—occurred on 11 March 1978. A force of nearly a dozen Fatah fighters landed their boats near a major coastal road connecting the city of Haifa with Tel Aviv-Yafo. There they hijacked a bus and sprayed gunfire inside and at passing vehicles, killing thirty-seven civilians.[84] In response, the IDF launched Operation Litani three days later, with the goal of taking control of Southern Lebanon up to the Litani River. The IDF achieved this goal, and secondnameplaceholder withdrew PLO forces north into Beirut.[85]After Israel withdrew from Lebanon, cross-border hostilities between PLO forces and Israel continued, though from August 1981 to May 1982, the PLO adopted an official policy of refraining from responding to provocations.[86] On 6 June 1982, Israel launched an invasion of Lebanon to expel the PLO from southern Lebanon. Beirut was soon besieged and bombarded by the IDF;[77] secondnameplaceholder declared the city to be the "Hanoi and Stalingrad of the Israeli army."[77] The Civil War's first phase ended and secondnameplaceholder—who was commanding Fatah forces at Tel al-Zaatar—narrowly escaped with assistance from Saudi and Kuwaiti diplomats.[87] Towards the end of the siege, the US and European governments brokered an agreement guaranteeing safe passage for secondnameplaceholder and the PLO—guarded by a multinational force of eight hundred US Marines supported by the US Navy—to exile in Tunis.[77]secondnameplaceholder returned to Lebanon a year after his eviction from Beirut, this time establishing himself in the northern Lebanese city of Tripoli. This time secondnameplaceholder was expelled by a fellow Palestinian working under Hafez al-Assad. secondnameplaceholder did not return to Lebanon after his second expulsion, though many Fatah fighters did.[77]
<h2>Headquarters in Tunisia</h2>
secondnameplaceholder and Fatah's center for operations was based in Tunis, the capital of Tunisia, until 1993. In 1985 secondnameplaceholder narrowly survived an Israeli assassination attempt when Israeli Air Force F-15s bombed his Tunis headquarters as part of Operation Wooden Leg, leaving 73 people dead; secondnameplaceholder had gone out jogging that morning.[88]During the 1980s, secondnameplaceholder received financial assistance from Libya, Iraq and Saudi Arabia, which allowed him to reconstruct the badly damaged PLO. This was particularly useful during the First Intifada in December 1987, which began as an uprising of Palestinians against the Israeli occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip. The word Intifada in Arabic is literally translated as "tremor"; however, it is generally defined as an uprising or revolt.[89]The first stage of the Intifada began following an incident at the Erez checkpoint where four Palestinian residents of the Jabalya refugee camp were killed in a traffic accident involving an Israeli driver. Rumors spread that the deaths were a deliberate act of revenge for an Israeli shopper who was stabbed to death by a Palestinian in Gaza four days earlier. Mass rioting broke out, and within weeks, partly upon consistent requests by Abu Jihad, secondnameplaceholder attempted to direct the uprising, which lasted until 1992–93. Abu Jihad had previously been assigned the responsibility of the Palestinian territories within the PLO command and, according to biographer Said Aburish, had "impressive knowledge of local conditions" in the Israeli-occupied territories. On 16 April 1988, as the Intifada was raging, Abu Jihad was assassinated in his Tunis household by an Israeli hit squad. secondnameplaceholder had considered Abu Jihad as a PLO counterweight to local Palestinian leadership in the territories, and led a funeral procession for him in Damascus.[89]The most common tactic used by Palestinians during the Intifada was throwing stones, molotov cocktails, and burning tires.[90] The local leadership in some West Bank towns commenced non-violent protests against Israeli occupation by engaging in tax resistance and other boycotts. Israel responded by confiscating large sums of money in house-to-house raids.[89][91] As the Intifada came to a close, new armed Palestinian groups—in particular Hamas and the Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ)—began targeting Israeli civilians with the new tactic of suicide bombings, and internal fighting amongst the Palestinians increased dramatically.[89]In 1970, secondnameplaceholder declared: "Our basic aim is to liberate the land from the Mediterranean Sea to the Jordan River. We are not concerned with what took place in June 1967 or in eliminating the consequences of the June war. The Palestinian revolution's basic concern is the uprooting of the Zionist entity from our land and liberating it."[92] However, in early 1976, at a meeting with US Senator Adlai Stevenson III, secondnameplaceholder suggested that if Israel withdrew a "few kilometers" from parts of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip and transferred responsibility to the UN, secondnameplaceholder could give "something to show his people before he could acknowledge Israel's right to exist".[93]On 15 November 1988, the PLO proclaimed the independent State of Palestine. Though he had frequently been accused of and associated with terrorism,[94][95][96] in speeches on 13 and 14 December secondnameplaceholder repudiated 'terrorism in all its forms, including state terrorism'. He accepted UN Security Council Resolution 242 and Israel's right "to exist in peace and security" and[97] secondnameplaceholder's statements were greeted with approval by the US administration, which had long insisted on these statements as a necessary starting point for official discussions between the US and the PLO. These remarks from secondnameplaceholder indicated a shift away from one of the PLO's primary aims—the destruction of Israel (as entailed in the Palestinian National Covenant)–and toward the establishment of two separate entities: an Israeli state within the 1949 armistice lines, and an Arab state in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. On 2 April 1989, secondnameplaceholder was elected by the Central Council of the Palestine National Council, the governing body of the PLO, to be the president of the proclaimed State of Palestine.[89]Prior to the Gulf War in 1990–91, when the Intifada's intensity began to wear down, secondnameplaceholder supported Saddam Hussein's invasion of Kuwait and opposed the US-led coalition attack on Iraq. He made this decision without the consent of other leading members of Fatah and the PLO. secondnameplaceholder's top aide Abu Iyad vowed to stay neutral and opposed an alliance with Saddam; on 17 January 1991, Abu Iyad was assassinated by the Abu Nidal Organization. secondnameplaceholder's decision also severed relations with Egypt and many of the oil-producing Arab states that supported the US-led coalition. Many in the US also used secondnameplaceholder's position as a reason to disregard his claims to being a partner for peace. After the end of hostilities, many Arab states that backed the coalition cut off funds to the PLO and began providing financial support for the organization's rival Hamas and other Islamist groups.[89] secondnameplaceholder narrowly escaped death again on 7 April 1992, when an Air Bissau aircraft he was a passenger on crash-landed in the Libyan Desert during a sandstorm. Two pilots and an engineer were killed; secondnameplaceholder was bruised and shaken.[98]
<h2>Palestinian Authority and peace negotiations</h2>
In the early 1990s, secondnameplaceholder and leading Fatah officials engaged the Israeli government in a series of secret talks and negotiations that led to the 1993 Oslo Accords.[70][99] The agreement called for the implementation of Palestinian self-rule in portions of the West Bank and Gaza Strip over a five-year period, along with an immediate halt to and gradual removal of Israeli settlements in those areas. The accords called for a Palestinian police force to be formed from local recruits and Palestinians abroad, to patrol areas of self-rule. Authority over the various fields of rule, including education and culture, social welfare, direct taxation and tourism, would be transferred to the Palestinian interim government. Both parties agreed also on forming a committee that would establish cooperation and coordination dealing with specific economic sectors, including utilities, industry, trade and communication.[100]Prior to signing the accords, secondnameplaceholder—as Chairman of the PLO and its official representative—signed two letters renouncing violence and officially recognizing Israel. In return, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, on behalf of Israel, officially recognized the PLO.[101] The following year, secondnameplaceholder and Rabin were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, along with Shimon Peres.[102] The Palestinian reaction was mixed. The Rejectionist Front of the PLO allied itself with Islamists in a common opposition against the agreements. It was rejected also by Palestinian refugees in Lebanon, Syria, and Jordan as well as by many Palestinian intellectuals and the local leadership of the Palestinian territories. However, the inhabitants of the territories generally accepted the agreements and secondnameplaceholder's promise for peace and economic well-being.[103]In accordance with the terms of the Oslo agreement, secondnameplaceholder was required to implement PLO authority in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. He insisted that financial support was imperative to establishing this authority and needed it to secure the acceptance of the agreements by the Palestinians living in those areas. However, Arab states of the Persian Gulf—secondnameplaceholder's usual source for financial backing—still refused to provide him and the PLO with any major donations for siding with Iraq during the 1991 Gulf War.[103] Ahmed Qurei—a key Fatah negotiator during the negotiations in Oslo—publicly announced that the PLO was bankrupt.[104]In 1994, secondnameplaceholder moved to Gaza City, which was controlled by the Palestinian National Authority (PNA)—the provisional entity created by the Oslo Accords.[102] secondnameplaceholder became the President and Prime Minister of the PNA, the Commander of the PLA and the Speaker of the PLC. In July, after the PNA was declared the official government of the Palestinians, the Basic Laws of the Palestinian National Authority was published,[105] in three different versions by the PLO. secondnameplaceholder proceeded with creating a structure for the PNA. He established an executive committee or cabinet composed of twenty members. secondnameplaceholder also replaced and assigned mayors and city councils for major cities such as Gaza and Nablus. He began subordinating non-governmental organizations that worked in education, health, and social affairs under his authority by replacing their elected leaders and directors with PNA officials loyal to him. He then appointed himself chairman of the Palestinian financial organization that was created by the World Bank to control most aid money towards helping the new Palestinian entity.[103]secondnameplaceholder established a Palestinian police force, named the Preventive Security Service (PSS), that became active on 13 May 1994. It was mainly composed of PLA soldiers and foreign Palestinian volunteers. secondnameplaceholder assigned Mohammed Dahlan and Jibril Rajoub to head the PSS.[103] Amnesty International accused secondnameplaceholder and the PNA leadership of failing to adequately investigate abuses by the PSS (including torture and unlawful killings) against political opponents and dissidents as well as the arrests of human rights activists.[106]Throughout November and December 1995, secondnameplaceholder toured dozens of Palestinian cities and towns that were evacuated by Israeli forces including Jenin, Ramallah, al-Bireh, Nablus, Qalqilyah and Tulkarm, declaring them "liberated". The PNA also gained control of the West Bank's postal service during this period.[107] On 20 January 1996, secondnameplaceholder was elected president of the PNA, with an overwhelming 88.2 percent majority (the other candidate was charity organizer Samiha Khalil). However, because Hamas, the DFLP and other popular opposition movements chose to boycott the presidential elections, the choices were limited. secondnameplaceholder's landslide victory guaranteed Fatah 51 of the 88 seats in the PLC. After secondnameplaceholder was elected to the post of President of the PNA, he was often referred to as the Ra'is, (literally president in Arabic), although he spoke of himself as "the general".[108]
In 1997, the PLC accused the executive branch of the PNA of financial mismanagement causing the resignation of four members of secondnameplaceholder's cabinet. secondnameplaceholder refused to resign his post.[109]In mid-1996, Benjamin Netanyahu was elected Prime Minister of Israel. Palestinian-Israeli relations grew even more hostile as a result of continued conflict.[110] Despite the Israel-PLO accord, Netanyahu opposed the idea of Palestinian statehood.[111] In 1998, US President Bill Clinton persuaded the two leaders to meet. The resulting Wye River Memorandum detailed the steps to be taken by the Israeli government and PNA to complete the peace process.[112]secondnameplaceholder continued negotiations with Netanyahu's successor, Ehud Barak, at the Camp David 2000 Summit in July 2000. Due partly to his own politics (Barak was from the leftist Labor Party, whereas Netanyahu was from the rightist Likud Party) and partly due to insistence for compromise by President Clinton, Barak offered secondnameplaceholder a Palestinian state in 73 percent of the West Bank and all of the Gaza Strip. The Palestinian percentage of sovereignty would extend to 90 percent over a ten- to twenty-five-year period. Also included in the offer was the return of a small number of refugees and compensation for those not allowed to return. Palestinians would also have "custodianship" over the Temple Mount, sovereignty on all Islamic and Christian holy sites, and three of Jerusalem's four Old City quarters. secondnameplaceholder rejected Barak's offer and refused to make an immediate counter-offer.[99] He told President Clinton that, "the Arab leader who would surrender Jerusalem is not born yet."[113]After the September 2000 outbreak of the Second Intifada, negotiations continued at the Taba summit in January 2001; this time, Ehud Barak pulled out of the talks to campaign in the Israeli elections. In October and December 2001, suicide bombings by Palestinian militant groups increased and Israeli counter strikes intensified. Following the election of Ariel Sharon in February, the peace process took a steep downfall. Palestinian elections scheduled for January 2002 were postponed—the stated reason was an inability to campaign due to the emergency conditions imposed by the Intifada, as well as IDF incursions and restrictions on freedom of movement in the Palestinian territories. In the same month, Sharon ordered secondnameplaceholder to be confined to his Mukata'a headquarters in Ramallah, following an attack in the Israeli city of Hadera;[113] US President George W. Bush supported Sharon's action, claiming that secondnameplaceholder was "an obstacle to the peace."[114]
<h2>Political survival</h2>
secondnameplaceholder's long personal and political survival was taken by most Western commentators as a sign of his mastery of asymmetric warfare and his skill as a tactician, given the extremely dangerous nature of politics of the Middle East and the frequency of assassinations.[115] Some commentators believe his survival was largely due to Israel's fear that he could become a martyr for the Palestinian cause if he were assassinated or even arrested by Israel.[116] Others believe that Israel refrained from taking action against secondnameplaceholder because it feared secondnameplaceholder less than Hamas and the other Islamist movements gaining support over Fatah. The complex and fragile web of relations between the US, Israel, Saudi Arabia, and other Arab states contributed also to secondnameplaceholder's longevity as the leader of the Palestinians.[115]Israel attempted to assassinate secondnameplaceholder on a number of occasions, but has never used its own agents, preferring instead to "turn" Palestinians close to the intended target, usually using blackmail.[117] According to Alan Hart, the Mossad's specialty is poison.[117] According to Abu Iyad, two attempts were made on secondnameplaceholder's life by the Israeli Mossad and the Military Directorate in 1970.[118] In 1976, Abu Sa'ed, a Palestinian agent working for the Mossad, was enlisted in a plot to put poison pellets that looked like grains of rice in secondnameplaceholder's food. Abu Iyad explains that Abu Sa'ed confessed after he received the order to go ahead, explaining that he was unable to go through with the plot because, "He was first of all a Palestinian and his conscience wouldn't let him do it."[119] secondnameplaceholder claimed in a 1988 interview with Time that because of his fear of assassination by the Israelis, he never slept in the same place two nights in a row.[120]secondnameplaceholder's ability to adapt to new tactical and political situations was perhaps tested by the rise of the Hamas and PIJ organizations, Islamist groups espousing rejectionist policies with Israel. These groups often bombed non-military targets, such as malls and movie theaters, to increase the psychological damage and civilian casualties. In the 1990s, these groups seemed to threaten secondnameplaceholder's capacity to hold together a unified nationalist organization with a goal of statehood.[115]An attack carried out by Hamas militants in March 2002 killed 29 Israeli civilians celebrating Passover, including many senior citizens.[121] In response, Israel launched Operation Defensive Shield, a major military offensive into major West Bank cities. Mahmoud al-Zahar, a Hamas leader in Gaza, stated in September 2010 that secondnameplaceholder had instructed Hamas to launch what he termed "military operations" against Israel in 2000 when secondnameplaceholder felt that negotiations with Israel would not succeed.[122]Some Israeli government officials opined in 2002 that the armed Fatah sub-group al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades commenced attacks towards Israel in order to compete with Hamas.[123] On 6 May 2002, the Israeli government released a report, based in part on documents, allegedly captured during the Israeli raid of secondnameplaceholder's Ramallah headquarters, which allegedly included copies of papers signed by secondnameplaceholder authorizing funding for al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades' activities. The report implicated secondnameplaceholder in the "planning and execution of terror attacks".[124]Persistent attempts by the Israeli government to identify another Palestinian leader to represent the Palestinian people failed. secondnameplaceholder was enjoying the support of groups that, given his own history, would normally have been quite wary of dealing with or supporting him. Marwan Barghouti (a leader of al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades) emerged as a possible replacement during the Second Intifada, but Israel had him arrested for allegedly being involved in the killing of twenty-six civilians, and he was sentenced to five life terms.[125]secondnameplaceholder was finally allowed to leave his compound on 2 May 2002 after intense negotiations led to a settlement: six PFLP militants, including the organization's secretary-general Ahmad Sa'adat, wanted by Israel, who had been holed up with secondnameplaceholder in his compound, would be transferred to international custody in Jericho. After the wanted men were handed over the siege was lifted.[126] With that, and a promise that he would issue a call to the Palestinians to halt attacks on Israelis, secondnameplaceholder was released. He issued such a call on 8 May. On 19 September 2002, the IDF largely demolished the compound with armored bulldozers in order to isolate secondnameplaceholder.[127][128][129] In March 2003, secondnameplaceholder ceded his post as Prime Minister to Mahmoud Abbas amid pressures by the US.[130]The Israeli security Cabinet on 11 September 2003 decided that "Israel will act to remove this obstacle [secondnameplaceholder] in the manner, at the time, and in the ways that will be decided on separately".[131] Israeli Cabinet members and officials hinted on secondnameplaceholder's death,[132][133][134] the Israeli military had begun making preparations for secondnameplaceholder's possible expulsion in the near future,[135][136] and many feared for his life. Israeli peace activists of Gush Shalom, Knesset members and others went into the Presidential Compound prepared to serve as a human shield.[137][138] The compound remained under siege until secondnameplaceholder's transfer to a French hospital, shortly before his death.In 2004, President Bush dismissed secondnameplaceholder as a negotiating partner, saying he had "failed as a leader", and accused him of undercutting Abbas when he was prime minister (Abbas resigned the same year he was given the position).[139] secondnameplaceholder had a mixed relationship with the leaders of other Arab nations. His support from Arab leaders tended to increase whenever he was pressured by Israel; for example, when Israel declared in 2003 it had made the decision, in principle, to remove him from the Israeli-controlled West Bank.[113] In an interview with the Arabic news network Al Jazeera, secondnameplaceholder responded to Ariel Sharon's suggestion that he be exiled from the Palestinian territories permanently, by stating, "Is it his [Sharon's] homeland or ours? We were planted here before the Prophet Abraham came, but it looks like they [Israelis] don't understand history or geography."[113]
<h2>Financial dealings</h2>
Under the Oslo Peace Accords, Israel undertook to deposit the VAT tax receipts on goods purchased by Palestinians into the Palestinian treasury. Until 2000, these monies were transferred directly to secondnameplaceholder's personal accounts at Bank Leumi, in Tel Aviv.
[140]In August 2002, the Israeli Military Intelligence Chief alleged that secondnameplaceholder's personal wealth was in the range of US$1.3 billion.[141] In 2003 the International Monetary Fund (IMF) conducted an audit of the PNA and stated that secondnameplaceholder had diverted $900 million in public funds to a special bank account controlled by himself and the PNA Chief Economic Financial adviser. However, the IMF did not claim that there were any improprieties, and it specifically stated that most of the funds had been used to invest in Palestinian assets, both internally and abroad.[142][143]However, in 2003, a team of American accountants—hired by secondnameplaceholder's own finance ministry—began examining secondnameplaceholder's finances. In its conclusions, the team claimed that part of the Palestinian leader's wealth was in a secret portfolio worth close to $1 billion, with investments in companies like a Coca-Cola bottling plant in Ramallah, a Tunisian cell phone company and venture capital funds in the U.S. and the Cayman Islands. The head of the investigation stated that "although the money for the portfolio came from public funds like Palestinian taxes, virtually none of it was used for the Palestinian people; it was all controlled by secondnameplaceholder. And none of these dealings were made public."[144] An investigation conducted by the General Accounting Office reported that secondnameplaceholder and the PLO held over $10 billion in assets even at the time when he was publicly claiming bankruptcy.[145]Although secondnameplaceholder lived a modest lifestyle, Dennis Ross, former Middle East negotiator for Presidents George H.W. Bush and Bill Clinton, stated that secondnameplaceholder's "walking-around money" financed a vast patronage system known as neopatrimonialism. According to Salam Fayyad—a former World Bank official whom secondnameplaceholder appointed Finance Minister of the PNA in 2002—secondnameplaceholder's commodity monopolies could accurately be seen as gouging his own people, "especially in Gaza which is poorer, which is something that is totally unacceptable and immoral." Fayyad claims that secondnameplaceholder used $20 million from public funds to pay the leadership of the PNA security forces (the Preventive Security Service) alone.[144]Fuad Shubaki, former financial aide to secondnameplaceholder, told the Israeli security service Shin Bet that secondnameplaceholder used several million dollars of aid money to buy weapons and support militant groups.[146] During Israel's Operation Defensive Shield, the Israel army recovered counterfeit money and documents from secondnameplaceholder's Ramallah headquarters. The documents showed that, in 2001, secondnameplaceholder personally approved payments to Tanzim militants.[147] The Palestinians claimed that the counterfeit money was confiscated from criminal elements.[148]
<h2>Illness and death</h2>
The Israeli government tried for decades to assassinate secondnameplaceholder, including attempting to intercept and shoot down private aircraft and commercial airliners on which he was believed to be traveling.[149] The assassination was initially assigned to Caesarea, the Mossad unit in charge of Israel's numerous targeted killings. Shooting down a commercial airliner in international airspace over very deep water was thought to be preferable to make recovery of the wreckage, and hence investigation, more difficult.[149] Following Israel's 1982 invasion of Lebanon, Israeli Minister of Defense Ariel Sharon created a special task force code named "Salt Fish" headed by special ops experts Meir Dagan and Rafi Eitan to track secondnameplaceholder's movements in Lebanon to kill him because Sharon saw secondnameplaceholder as a "Jew murderer" and an important symbol, symbols being as important as body counts in a war against a terrorist organization. The Salt Fish task force orchestrated the bombing of buildings where secondnameplaceholder and senior PLO leaders were believed to be staying. Later renamed "Operation Goldfish", Israeli operatives followed Israeli journalist Uri Avnery to a meeting with secondnameplaceholder in an additional unsuccessful attempt to kill him. In 2001, Sharon as prime minister is believed to have made a commitment to cease attempts to assassinate secondnameplaceholder. However following Israel's successful assassination in March 2004 of Sheikh Ahmed Yassin, a founder of the Hamas movement, Sharon stated in April 2004 that "this commitment of mine no longer exists."[149]The first reports of secondnameplaceholder's failing health by his doctors for what his spokesman said was influenza came on 25 October 2004, after he vomited during a staff meeting. His condition deteriorated in the following days.[150] Following visits by other doctors, including teams from Tunisia, Jordan, and Egypt—and agreement by Israel to allow him to travel—secondnameplaceholder was flown from Ramallah to Jordan by a Jordanian military helicopter and from there to France on a French military plane. He was admitted to the Percy military hospital in Clamart, a suburb of Paris.[151][152][153] On 3 November, he had lapsed into a gradually deepening coma.[154]secondnameplaceholder was pronounced dead at 03:30 UTC on 11 November 2004 at the age of 75 of what French doctors called a massive hemorrhagic cerebrovascular accident (hemorrhagic stroke).[155][156] Initially, secondnameplaceholder's medical records were withheld by senior Palestinian officials, and secondnameplaceholder's wife refused an autopsy.[157] French doctors also said that secondnameplaceholder suffered from a blood condition known as disseminated intravascular coagulation, although it is inconclusive what brought about the condition.[158][159] When secondnameplaceholder's death was announced, the Palestinian people went into a state of mourning, with Qur'anic mourning prayers emitted from mosque loudspeakers throughout the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, and tires burned in the streets.[160] The Palestinian Authority and refugee camps in Lebanon declared 40 days of mourning.[161][162]On 11 November 2004, a French Army guard of honour held a brief ceremony for secondnameplaceholder, with his coffin draped in a Palestinian flag. A military band played the French and Palestinian national anthems, and a Chopin funeral march.[163] French President Jacques Chirac stood alone beside secondnameplaceholder's coffin for about ten minutes in a last show of respect for secondnameplaceholder, whom he hailed as "a man of courage".[164] The next day, secondnameplaceholder's body was flown from Paris aboard a French Air Force transport plane to Cairo, Egypt, for a brief military funeral there, attended by several heads of states, prime ministers and foreign ministers.[165] Egypt's top Muslim cleric Sayed Tantawi led mourning prayers preceding the funeral procession.[151]Israel refused secondnameplaceholder's wish to be buried near the Al-Aqsa Mosque or anywhere in Jerusalem, citing security concerns.[166] Israel also feared that his burial would strengthen Palestinian claims to East Jerusalem.[167] Following the Cairo procession, secondnameplaceholder was "temporarily" buried within the Mukataa in Ramallah; tens of thousands of Palestinians attended the ceremony.[151] secondnameplaceholder was buried in a stone, rather than wooden, coffin, and Palestinian spokesman Saeb Erekat said that secondnameplaceholder would be reburied in East Jerusalem following the establishment of a Palestinian state. After Sheikh Taissir Tamimi discovered that secondnameplaceholder was buried improperly and in a coffin—which is not in accordance with Islamic law—secondnameplaceholder was reburied on the morning of 13 November at around 3:00 am.[168] On 10 November 2007, prior to the third anniversary of secondnameplaceholder's death, President Mahmoud Abbas unveiled a mausoleum for secondnameplaceholder near his tomb in commemoration of him.[169]Numerous conspiracy theories have circulated regarding secondnameplaceholder's death, with the most prominent being poisoning[170][171][172][173] (possibly by polonium) and[174] AIDS-related illnesses,[175][176][177] as well as liver disease[178] or a platelet disorder.[179]In September 2005, an Israeli-declared AIDS expert claimed that secondnameplaceholder bore all the symptoms of AIDS based on obtained medical records.[175] But others, including Patrice Mangin of the University of Lausanne and The New York Times, disagreed with this claim, insisting that secondnameplaceholder's record indicated that it was highly unlikely that the cause of his death was AIDS.[180][181] secondnameplaceholder's personal doctor Ashraf al-Kurdi and aide Bassam Abu Sharif maintained that secondnameplaceholder was poisoned,[170][171] possibly by thallium.[172] A senior Israeli physician concluded that secondnameplaceholder died from food poisoning.[175] Both Israeli and Palestinian officials have denied claims that secondnameplaceholder was poisoned.[175][182] Palestinian foreign minister Nabil Shaath ruled out poisoning after talks with secondnameplaceholder's French doctors.[182]On 4 July 2012, Al Jazeera published the results of a nine-month investigation, which revealed that none of the causes of secondnameplaceholder's death suggested in several rumors could be true. Tests carried out by a Swiss scientific experts found traces of polonium in quantities much higher than could occur naturally on secondnameplaceholder's personal belongings.[180][183] On 12 October 2013, the British medical journal The Lancet published a peer-reviewed article by the Swiss experts about the analysis of the 38 samples of secondnameplaceholder's clothes and belongings and 37 reference samples which were known to be polonium-free, suggesting that secondnameplaceholder could have died of polonium poisoning.[184][185]On 27 November 2012, three teams of international investigators, a French, a Swiss, and a Russian team, collected samples from secondnameplaceholder's body and the surrounding soil in the mausoleum in Ramallah, to carry out an investigation independently from each other.[186][187][188]On 6 November 2013, Al Jazeera reported that the Swiss forensic team had found levels of polonium in secondnameplaceholder's ribs and pelvis 18 to 36 times the average. According to the Swiss expert team (including notably experts in radio-chemistry, radio-physics and legal medicine), on a probability scale ranging from one to six, death by polonium poisoning is around five.[185] While Al Jazeera reported that the scientist were "confident up to an 83 percent level" that polonium poisoning occurred, but Francois Bochud (the head of the Swiss team) clarified to Al Jazeera that this is not the case and that the scale does not allow a simple division like this; he stated only that the poisoning hypothesis by polonium is "reasonably supported".[189][190][191][185] Forensic Biologist Nathan Lents of the John Jay College of Criminal Justice, said the report's results are consistent with a possible polonium poisoning, but "There's certainly not a smoking gun here." Derek Hill, a professor in radiological science at University College London who was not involved in the investigation, said "I would say it's clearly not overwhelming proof, and there is a risk of contamination (of the samples), but it is a pretty strong signal. ... It seems likely what they're doing is putting a very cautious interpretation of strong data."[192]On 26 December 2013, a team of Russian scientists released a report saying they had found no trace of radioactive poisoning—a finding that comes after the French report found traces of the radioactive isotope polonium. Vladimir Uiba, the head of the Federal Medical and Biological Agency, said that secondnameplaceholder died of natural causes and the agency had no plans to conduct further tests.[193] Unlike the Swiss report, the French and Russian reports were not made public, at the time.[185] The Swiss experts read the French and Russian reports and argued that the radiologic data measured by the other teams support their conclusions of a probable death by polonium poisoning.[185] In March 2015 a French prosecutor closed a 2012 French inquiry, stating that French experts had determined secondnameplaceholder's death was of natural causes, and that the polonium and lead traces found were environmental.[194]
<h2>Legacy</h2>
Places named in his honor include:
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (/rəˈbiːn/;[1] Hebrew: יִצְחָק רַבִּין‎, IPA: [jitsˈχak ʁaˈbin] (listen); 1 March 1922 – 4 November 1995) was an Israeli politician, statesman and general. He was the fifth Prime Minister of Israel, serving two terms in office, 1974–77, and from 1992 until his assassination in 1995.secondnameplaceholder was born in Jerusalem to Jewish immigrants from Eastern Europe and was raised in a Labor Zionist household. He learned agriculture in school and excelled as a student. He led a 27-year career as a soldier. As a teenager he joined the Palmach, the commando force of the Yishuv. He eventually rose through its ranks to become its chief of operations during the 1948 Arab–Israeli War. He joined the newly formed Israel Defense Forces in late 1948 and continued to rise as a promising officer. He helped shape the training doctrine of the IDF in the early 1950s, and led the IDF's Operations Directorate from 1959 to 1963. He was appointed Chief of the General Staff in 1964 and oversaw Israel's victory in the 1967 Six-Day War.secondnameplaceholder served as Israel's ambassador to the United States from 1968 to 1973, during a period of deepening U.S.–Israel ties. He was appointed Prime Minister of Israel in 1974, after the resignation of Golda Meir. In his first term, secondnameplaceholder signed the Sinai Interim Agreement and ordered the Entebbe raid. He resigned in 1977 in the wake of a financial scandal. secondnameplaceholder was Israel's minister of defense for much of the 1980s, including during the outbreak of the First Intifada.In 1992, secondnameplaceholder was re-elected as prime minister on a platform embracing the Israeli–Palestinian peace process. He signed several historic agreements with the Palestinian leadership as part of the Oslo Accords.  In 1994, secondnameplaceholder won the Nobel Peace Prize together with long-time political rival Shimon Peres and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat. secondnameplaceholder also signed a peace treaty with Jordan in 1994. In November 1995, he was assassinated by an extremist named Yigal Amir, who opposed the terms of the Oslo Accords. Amir was convicted of secondnameplaceholder's murder and sentenced to life imprisonment. secondnameplaceholder was the first native-born prime minister of Israel, the only prime minister to be assassinated and the second to die in office after Levi Eshkol. secondnameplaceholder has become a symbol of the Israeli–Palestinian peace process.
<h2>Personal life</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born at Shaare Zedek Medical Center in Jerusalem on 1 March 1922, Mandatory Palestine, to Nehemiah (1886 – 1 December 1971) and Rosa (née Cohen; 1890 – 12 November 1937)  secondnameplaceholder, immigrants of the Third Aliyah, the third wave of Jewish immigration to Palestine from Europe. Nehemiah was born Nehemiah Rubitzov in the shtetl Sydorovychi near Ivankiv in the southern Pale of Settlement (present-day Ukraine).[2] His father Menachem died when he was a boy, and Nehemiah worked to support his family from an early age. At the age of 18, he emigrated to the United States, where he joined the Poale Zion party and changed his surname to secondnameplaceholder. In 1917, Nehemiah secondnameplaceholder went to Mandatory Palestine with a group of volunteers from the Jewish Legion.firstnameplaceholder's mother, Rosa Cohen, was born in 1890 in Mogilev in Belarus. Her father, a rabbi, opposed the Zionist movement and sent Rosa to a Christian high school for girls in Gomel, which gave her a broad general education. Early on, Rosa took an interest in political and social causes. In 1919, she traveled to Palestine on the steamship Ruslan. After working on a kibbutz on the shores of the Sea of Galilee, she moved to Jerusalem.[3]secondnameplaceholder's parents met in Jerusalem during the 1920 Nebi Musa riots.[4] They moved to Tel Aviv's Chlenov Street near Jaffa in 1923. Nehemiah became a worker for the Palestine Electric Corporation and Rosa was an accountant and local activist. She became a member of the Tel Aviv City Council.[5] The family moved again in 1931 to a two-room apartment on Hamagid Street in Tel Aviv.[6]secondnameplaceholder grew up in Tel Aviv, where the family relocated when he was one year old. He enrolled in the Tel Aviv Beit Hinuch Leyaldei Ovdim (בית חינוך לילדי עובדים, "School House for Workers' Children") in 1928 and completed his studies there in 1935. The school taught the children agriculture as well as Zionism.[7] secondnameplaceholder mostly received good marks in school, but he was so shy that few people knew he was intelligent.[8]In 1935, secondnameplaceholder enrolled at an agricultural school on kibbutz Givat Hashlosha that his mother founded. It was here in 1936 at the age of 14 that secondnameplaceholder joined the Haganah and received his first military training, learning how to use a pistol and stand guard. He joined a socialist-Zionist youth movement, HaNoar HaOved.[9]In 1937, he enrolled at the two-year Kadoorie Agricultural High School. He excelled in a number of agriculture-related subjects but disliked studying English language—the language of the British "enemy."[10][11] He originally aspired to be an irrigation engineer, but his interest in military affairs intensified in 1938, when the ongoing Arab revolt worsened. A young Haganah sergeant named Yigal Allon, later a general in the IDF and prominent politician, trained secondnameplaceholder and others at Kadoorie. secondnameplaceholder finished at Kadoorie in August 1940.[12] For part of 1939, the British closed Kadoorie, and secondnameplaceholder joined Allon as a military policeman at Kibbutz Ginosar until the school re-opened.[13] When he finished school, secondnameplaceholder considered studying irrigation engineering on scholarship at the University of California, Berkeley, although he ultimately decided to stay and fight in Palestine.[14]
<h2>Marriage and family</h2>
secondnameplaceholder married Leah Schlossberg during the 1948 Arab–Israeli War. Leah secondnameplaceholder was working at the time as a reporter for a Palmach newspaper. They had two children, Dalia (born 19 March 1950) and Yuval (born 18 June 1955). Similar to the entire Israeli elite of the time, secondnameplaceholder adhered to a secular-national understanding of Jewish identity, and was non-religious. American diplomat Dennis Ross described him as "the most secular Jew he had met in Israel".[15]
<h2>Military career</h2>
In 1941, during his practical training at kibbutz Ramat Yohanan, secondnameplaceholder joined the newly formed Palmach section of the Haganah, under the influence of Yigal Allon. secondnameplaceholder could not yet operate a machine gun, drive a car, or ride a motorcycle, but Moshe Dayan accepted the new recruit.[16] The first operation he participated in was assisting the allied invasion of Lebanon, then held by Vichy French forces (the same operation in which Dayan lost his eye) in June–July 1941.[17] Allon continued to train the young Palmach forces.As a Palmachnik, secondnameplaceholder and his men had to lie low to avoid arousing inquiry from the British administration. They spent most of their time farming, training secretly part-time.[18] They wore no uniforms and received no public recognition during this time.[19] In 1943, secondnameplaceholder took command of a platoon at Kfar Giladi. He trained his men in modern tactics and how to conduct lightning attacks.[20]After the end of the war the relationship between the Palmach and the British authorities became strained, especially with respect to the treatment of Jewish immigration. In October 1945 secondnameplaceholder planned a Palmach raid on the Atlit detainee camp in which 208 Jewish illegal immigrants who had been interned there were freed. In the Black Shabbat, a massive British operation against the leaders of the Jewish Establishment in the British Mandate of Palestine and the Palmach, secondnameplaceholder was arrested and detained for five months. After his release he became the commander of the second Palmach battalion and rose to the position of Chief Operations Officer of the Palmach in October 1947.During the 1948 Arab–Israeli War secondnameplaceholder directed Israeli operations in Jerusalem and fought the Egyptian army in the Negev. During the beginning of the war he was the commander of the Harel Brigade, which fought on the road to Jerusalem from the coastal plain, including the Israeli "Burma Road", as well as many battles in Jerusalem, such as securing the southern side of the city by recapturing kibbutz Ramat Rachel.During the first truce secondnameplaceholder commanded IDF forces on the beach of Tel Aviv confronting the Irgun during the Altalena Affair.In the following period he was the deputy commander of Operation Danny, the largest scale operation to that point, which involved four IDF brigades. The cities of Ramle and Lydda were captured, as well as the major airport in Lydda, as part of the operation. Following the capture of the two towns there was an exodus of their Arab population. secondnameplaceholder signed the expulsion order, which included the following:Later, secondnameplaceholder was chief of operations for the Southern Front and participated in the major battles ending the fighting there, including Operation Yoav and Operation Horev.In the beginning of 1949 he was a member of the Israeli delegation to the armistice talks with Egypt that were held on the island of Rhodes. The result of the negotiations were the 1949 Armistice Agreements, which ended the official hostilities of the 1948 Arab–Israeli War. Following the demobilization at the end of the war he was the most senior (former) member of the Palmach that remained in the IDF.Like many Palmach leaders, secondnameplaceholder was politically aligned with the left wing pro-Soviet Ahdut HaAvoda party and later Mapam. These officers were distrusted by Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion and several resigned from the army in 1953 after a series of confrontations. Those members of Mapam who remained, such as secondnameplaceholder, Haim Bar-Lev and David Elazar, had to endure several years in staff or training posts before resuming their careers.[22]secondnameplaceholder headed Israel's Northern Command from 1956 to 1959.[23] In 1964 he was appointed chief of staff of the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) by Levi Eshkol, who had replaced David Ben-Gurion as Prime Minister and Minister of Defence. Since Eshkol did not have much military experience and trusted secondnameplaceholder's judgement, he had a very free hand. According to the memoirs of Eshkol's military secretary, Eshkol followed secondnameplaceholder "with closed eyes".[24]Under his command, the IDF achieved victory over Egypt, Syria and Jordan in the Six-Day War in 1967. After the Old City of Jerusalem was captured by the IDF, secondnameplaceholder was among the first to visit the Old City, and delivered a famous speech on Mount Scopus, at the Hebrew University. In the days leading up to the war, it was reported that secondnameplaceholder suffered a nervous breakdown and was unable to function.[25] After this short hiatus, he resumed full command over the IDF.
<h2>Ambassador and Minister of Labour</h2>
Following his retirement from the IDF he became ambassador to the United States beginning in 1968, serving for five years. In this period the US became the major weapon supplier of Israel and in particular he managed to get the embargo on the F-4 Phantom fighter jets lifted. During the 1973 Yom Kippur War he served in no official capacity and in the elections held at the end of 1973 he was elected to the Knesset as a member of the Alignment. He was appointed Israeli Minister of Labour in March 1974 in Golda Meir's short-lived government.[26] While serving as ambassador, secondnameplaceholder met and formed a relationship with Menachem M. Schneerson.[27]
<h2>First term as Prime Minister</h2>
Following Golda Meir's resignation in April 1974, secondnameplaceholder was elected party leader, after he defeated Shimon Peres. The rivalry between these two Labour leaders remained fierce and they competed several times in the next two decades for the leadership role, and even for who deserved credit for government achievements.[28] secondnameplaceholder succeeded Golda Meir as Prime Minister of Israel on 3 June 1974. This was a coalition government, including Ratz, the Independent Liberals, Progress and Development and the Arab List for Bedouins and Villagers. This arrangement, with a bare parliamentary majority, held for a few months and was one of the few periods in Israel's history where the religious parties were not part of the coalition. The National Religious Party joined the coalition on 30 October 1974 and Ratz left on 6 November.In foreign policy, the major development at the beginning of secondnameplaceholder's term was the Sinai Interim Agreement between Israel and Egypt, signed on 1 September 1975. Both countries declared that the conflict between them and in the Middle East shall not be resolved by military force but by peaceful means.[29] This agreement followed Henry Kissinger's shuttle diplomacy and a threatened "reassessment" of the United States' regional policy and its relations with Israel. secondnameplaceholder notes it was "an innocent-sounding term that heralded one of the worst periods in American–Israeli relations."[30] But the agreement was an important step towards the Camp David Accords of 1978 and the peace treaty with Egypt signed in 1979.Operation Entebbe was perhaps the most dramatic event during secondnameplaceholder's first term of office. On his orders, the IDF performed a long-range undercover raid to rescue passengers of an airliner hijacked by militants belonging to the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine's Wadie Haddad faction and the German Revolutionary Cells (RZ), who had been brought to Idi Amin's Uganda.[31] The operation was generally considered a tremendous success, and its spectacular character has made it the subject of much continued comment and study.Towards the end of 1976 his coalition government with the religious parties suffered a crisis: A motion of no confidence had been brought by Agudat Yisrael over a breach of the Sabbath on an Israeli Air Force base when four F-15 jets were delivered from the US and the National Religious Party had abstained. secondnameplaceholder dissolved his government and decided on new elections, which were to be held in May 1977.Following the March 1977 meeting between secondnameplaceholder and U.S. President Jimmy Carter, secondnameplaceholder publicly announced that the U.S. supported the Israeli idea of defensible borders; Carter then issued a clarification. A "fallout" in U.S./Israeli relations ensued. It is thought that the fallout contributed to the Israeli Labor Party's defeat in the May 1977 elections.[32] On 15 March 1977, Haaretz journalist Dan Margalit revealed that a joint dollar account in the names of firstnameplaceholder and Leah secondnameplaceholder, opened in a Washington, D.C., bank during secondnameplaceholder's term of office as Israel ambassador (1968–73), was still open, in breach of Israeli law.[33] According to Israeli currency regulations at the time, it was illegal for citizens to maintain foreign bank accounts without prior authorization. secondnameplaceholder resigned on 8 April 1977, following the revelation by Maariv journalist S. Isaac Mekel that the secondnameplaceholders held two accounts in Washington, not one, containing $10,000, and that a Finance Ministry administrative penalty committee fined them IL150,000.[34] secondnameplaceholder withdrew from the party leadership and candidacy for prime minister.
<h2>Opposition Knesset member and Minister of Defense</h2>
Following his resignation and Labour Party defeat at the elections, Likud's Menachem Begin was elected in 1977. Until 1984 secondnameplaceholder had been a member of Knesset and had sat on the Foreign Affairs and Defense Committee. From 1984 to 1990, he served as Minister of Defense in several national unity governments led by prime ministers firstnameplaceholder Shamir and Shimon Peres. When secondnameplaceholder came to office, Israeli troops were still deep in Lebanon. secondnameplaceholder ordered their withdrawal to a "Security Zone" on the Lebanese side of the border. The South Lebanon Army was active in this zone, along with the Israeli Defence Forces.On 4 August 1985 Minister of Defence secondnameplaceholder introduced an Iron Fist policy in the West Bank, reviving the use of British Mandate era legislation to detain people without trial, demolish houses, close newspapers and institutions as well as deporting activists. The change in policy came after a sustained public campaign demanding a tougher policy following the May 1985 prisoner exchange in which 1,150 Palestinians had been released.[35]When the first Intifada broke out, secondnameplaceholder adopted harsh measures to stop the demonstrations, even authorizing the use of "Force, might and beatings," on the demonstrators.[36][37] secondnameplaceholder the "bone breaker" was used as an International image.[38] The combination of the failure of the "Iron Fist" policy, Israel's deteriorating international image, and Jordan cutting legal and administrative ties to the West Bank with the U.S.'s recognition of the PLO as the representative of the Palestinian people forced secondnameplaceholder to seek an end to the violence through negotiation and dialogue with the PLO.[38][39] From 1990 to 1992, secondnameplaceholder again served as a Knesset member and sat on the Foreign Affairs and Defense Committee.
<h2>Second term as Prime Minister</h2>
In 1992 secondnameplaceholder was elected as chairman of the Labor Party, winning against Shimon Peres. In the elections that year his party, strongly focusing on the popularity of its leader, managed to win a clear victory over the Likud of incumbent Prime Minister firstnameplaceholder Shamir. However, the left-wing bloc in the Knesset only won an overall narrow majority, facilitated by the disqualification of small nationalist parties that did not manage to pass the electoral threshold. secondnameplaceholder formed the first Labor-led government in fifteen years, supported by a coalition with Meretz, a left wing party, and Shas, a Mizrahi ultra-orthodox religious party.On 25 July 1993, after Hezbollah fired rockets into northern Israel, secondnameplaceholder authorized a week-long military operation in Lebanon.[40] secondnameplaceholder played a leading role in the signing of the Oslo Accords, which created the Palestinian National Authority and granted it partial control over parts of the Gaza Strip and West Bank. Prior to the signing of the accords, secondnameplaceholder received a letter from PLO chairman Yasser Arafat renouncing violence and officially recognizing Israel, and on the same day, 9 September 1993, secondnameplaceholder sent Arafat a letter officially recognizing the PLO.[41]After the announcement of the Oslo Accords there were many protest demonstrations in Israel objecting to the Accords. As these protests dragged on, secondnameplaceholder insisted that as long as he had a majority in the Knesset he would ignore the protests and the protesters. In this context he said, "they (the protesters) can spin around and around like propellers"[42] but he would continue on the path of the Oslo Accords. secondnameplaceholder's parliamentary majority rested on non-coalition member Arab support.[43] secondnameplaceholder also denied the right of American Jews to object to his plan for peace, calling any such dissent "chutzpah".[44] The Oslo agreement was also opposed by Hamas and other Palestinian factions, which launched suicide bombings at Israel.[45]After the historical handshake with Yasser Arafat,[46] secondnameplaceholder said, on behalf of the Israeli people, "We who have fought against you, the Palestinians, we say to you today, in a loud and a clear voice; Enough of blood and tears. Enough!"[47][48] During this term of office, secondnameplaceholder also oversaw the signing of the Israel–Jordan peace treaty in 1994.[49]secondnameplaceholder significantly reformed Israel's economy, as well as its education and healthcare systems. His government significantly expanded the privatization of business, moving away from the country's traditionally socialized economy. The scheme was described by Moshe Arens as a "privatization frenzy". In 1993, his government set up the "Yozma" program, under which attractive tax incentives were offered to foreign venture capital funds that invested in Israel and promised to double any investment with government funding. As a result, foreign venture capital funds invested heavily in the growing Israeli high-tech industry, contributing to Israel's economic growth and status as a world leader in high-tech. In 1995, the National Health Insurance Law was passed. The law created Israel's universal health care system, moving away from the traditionally Histadrut-dominated health insurance system. Doctors' wages were also raised by 50%. Education spending was raised by 70%, with new colleges being built in Israel's peripheral areas, and teachers' wages rising by one-fifth. His government also launched new public works projects such as the Cross-Israel Highway and an expansion of Ben Gurion Airport.[50][51][52][53]For his role in the creation of the Oslo Accords, secondnameplaceholder was awarded the 1994 Nobel Peace Prize, along with Yasser Arafat and Shimon Peres.[54][55] The Accords greatly divided Israeli society, with some seeing secondnameplaceholder as a hero for advancing the cause of peace and some seeing him as a traitor for giving away land they viewed as rightfully belonging to Israel. Many Israelis on the right wing often blame him for Jewish deaths in terror attacks, attributing them to the Oslo agreements.[56]
<h2>Assassination and aftermath</h2>
On the evening of 4 November 1995 (12th of Heshvan on the Hebrew Calendar[58]), secondnameplaceholder was assassinated by Yigal Amir, a right-wing extremist who opposed the signing of the Oslo Accords. secondnameplaceholder had been attending a mass rally at the Kings of Israel Square (now secondnameplaceholder Square) in Tel Aviv, held in support of the Oslo Accords. When the rally ended, secondnameplaceholder walked down the city hall steps towards the open door of his car, at which point Amir fired three shots at secondnameplaceholder with a semi-automatic pistol. Two shots hit secondnameplaceholder, and the third lightly injured Yoram Rubin, one of secondnameplaceholder's bodyguards. secondnameplaceholder was taken to the nearby Ichilov Hospital, where he died on the operating table of blood loss and two punctured lungs. Amir was immediately seized by secondnameplaceholder's bodyguards and police. He was later tried, found guilty, and sentenced to life imprisonment. After an emergency cabinet meeting, Israel's foreign minister, Shimon Peres, was appointed as acting Israeli prime minister.[59]secondnameplaceholder's assassination came as a great shock to the Israeli public and much of the rest of the world. Hundreds of thousands of Israelis thronged the square where secondnameplaceholder was assassinated to mourn his death. Young people, in particular, turned out in large numbers, lighting memorial candles and singing peace songs. On 6 November 1995, he was buried on Mount Herzl. secondnameplaceholder's funeral was attended by many world leaders, among them U.S. president Bill Clinton, Australian Prime Minister Paul Keating, Egyptian president Hosni Mubarak and King Hussein of Jordan. Clinton delivered a eulogy whose final words were in Hebrew – "Shalom, Haver" (Hebrew: שלום חבר‎, lit. Goodbye, Friend).[60][61]The square where he was assassinated, Kikar Malkhei Yisrael (Kings of Israel Square), was renamed secondnameplaceholder Square in his honor. Many other streets and public institutions in Israel have also subsequently been named after him. After his assassination, secondnameplaceholder was hailed as a national symbol and came to embody the ethos of the "Israeli peace camp," despite his military career and hawkish views earlier in life.[62] In November 2000, his wife Leah died and was buried alongside him.After the murder, it was revealed that Avishai Raviv, a well known right-wing extremist at the time, was in fact a Shin Bet agent-informer code-named Champagne. Raviv was later acquitted in court of charges that he failed to prevent the assassination. The court ruled there was no evidence that Raviv knew assassin Yigal Amir was plotting to kill secondnameplaceholder.[63] After secondnameplaceholder's assassination, his daughter Dalia secondnameplaceholder-Pelossof entered politics and was elected to the Knesset in 1999 as part of the Center Party. In 2001, she served as Israel's deputy minister of defense.[64]
(!!)Article(!/!)
Sir firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder KCMG CBE FRS (4 November 1908 – 31 August 2005) was a Polish physicist, a self-described "Pole with a British passport".[2] secondnameplaceholder worked on Tube Alloys and the Manhattan Project during World War II, but left the Los Alamos Laboratory after the war with Germany ended. His work on nuclear fallout was a major contribution toward the ratification of the 1963 Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.  A signatory of the 1955 Russell–Einstein Manifesto, he was secretary-general of the Pugwash Conferences on Science and World Affairs from their founding until 1973 and shared, with the Pugwash Conferences, the 1995 Nobel Peace Prize "for efforts to diminish the part played by nuclear arms in international affairs and, in the longer run, to eliminate such arms."[3]
<h2>Early life</h2>
Józef secondnameplaceholder was born on 4 November 1908, to a Polish-Jewish family in Warsaw,[4] in what was then Russian Poland.[5] He was one of seven children, two of whom died in infancy.[6] His father, Zygmunt secondnameplaceholder, built up and ran a nationwide horse-drawn carriage business, owned land and bred horses. Józef's early years were spent in what was a prosperous household but circumstances changed at the outbreak of World War I. Borders were closed and the family's horses were requisitioned, leading to the failure of the business and poverty for their family.[5] Despite having a religious background, by the age of ten, he doubted the existence of God,[7] and later became an agnostic.[8][9]secondnameplaceholder's parents could not afford to send him to a gymnasium, so secondnameplaceholder received his secondary education in a cheder taught by a local rabbi. He then attended a technical school, where he studied electrical engineering, graduating with his diploma in 1923. After graduating, secondnameplaceholder worked as an electrician in Warsaw, but had an ambition to become a physicist.[6] He sat the entrance examinations of the Free University of Poland in January 1929, and passed the physics one with ease, but was less successful in writing a paper about the Commission of National Education, a subject about which he knew nothing. He was then interviewed by Ludwik Wertenstein [pl], the Dean of the Science Faculty. Wertenstein had studied in Paris under Marie Curie and at the Cavendish Laboratory at the University of Cambridge under Ernest Rutherford. Wertenstein offered secondnameplaceholder a place.[10]secondnameplaceholder earned a Master of Arts at the Free University in 1932. After, he entered the University of Warsaw, and became a Doctor of Physics in 1938. He held the position of Research Fellow in the Radiological Laboratory of the Scientific Society of Warsaw, of which Wertenstein was the director, and became assistant Director of the Atomic Physics Institute of the Free University of Poland in 1938.[11]
<h2>Marriage and early physics work</h2>
During this period, secondnameplaceholder married a literature student, Tola Gryn, whom he had met at a student summer camp in 1930.[4][12]Before the outbreak of World War II, he conducted experiments that showed that in the fission process, neutrons were emitted.[13] In early 1939, he envisaged that a large number of fissions could occur and if this happened within a sufficiently short time, then considerable amounts of energy could be released. He went on to calculate that this process could occur in less than a microsecond, and as a consequence would result in an explosion.[14][15]In 1939, through Wertenstein's connections, secondnameplaceholder was invited to study in Paris and at the University of Liverpool under James Chadwick, winner of the 1932 Nobel Prize for discovering the neutron. Chadwick was building a particle accelerator called a "cyclotron" to study fundamental nuclear reactions, and secondnameplaceholder wanted to build a similar machine in Warsaw, so he decided to join Chadwick in Liverpool. He travelled to England alone because he could not afford to support his wife there.[16]Before long, Chadwick gave secondnameplaceholder a fellowship (the Oliver Lodge Fellowship), doubling his income, and in that summer of 1939, the young Pole returned home, intending to bring Tola back with him.[17] When the time came to leave Warsaw in late August, however, she was ill following an operation for appendicitis, and remained behind, expecting to follow within days; however, the outbreak of war brought calamity.[18] Tola was trapped, and desperate efforts in the ensuing months to bring her out through Denmark (with the help of Niels Bohr), Belgium, and finally Italy came to nothing, as each country in turn was closed off by the war.[19] He never saw her again; she was murdered in the Holocaust at the Belzec concentration camp.[20] This affected him deeply for the rest of his life, and he never remarried.[21]
<h2>Manhattan Project</h2>
While still in Poland, secondnameplaceholder had realised that nuclear fission might possibly be used to produce an atomic bomb. He first thought that he should "put the whole thing out of my mind",[22] but he continued because he thought the only way to prevent Nazi Germany from using a nuclear bomb was if Britain had one to act as a deterrent. He worked with Chadwick on Tube Alloys, the British atomic bomb project.[22]In February 1944, secondnameplaceholder joined the Los Alamos Laboratory as part of Chadwick's British Mission to the Manhattan Project.[22] The usual condition for people to work on the Manhattan Project was that they had to become US citizens or British subjects. secondnameplaceholder declined, and the condition was waived.[23] At Los Alamos, he was befriended by Stan Ulam, a fellow Polish-Jewish scientist, with whom he was able to converse in Polish. secondnameplaceholder worked in Egon Bretscher's group, investigating whether high-energy gamma rays produced by nuclear fission would interfere with the nuclear chain reaction process, and then with Robert R. Wilson's cyclotron group.[24]secondnameplaceholder continued to have strong reservations about the use of science to develop such a devastating weapon. In 1985, he related that at a private dinner at the Chadwicks' house at Los Alamos in March 1944, he was shocked to hear the director of the Manhattan Project, Major General Leslie R. Groves, Jr., say words to the effect that the real purpose in making the bomb was to subdue the Soviets.[25] Historians, notably Barton Bernstein, have cast doubt on this story.[26]By the end of 1944, it was also apparent that Germany had abandoned the development of its own bomb and secondnameplaceholder asked to leave the project. Chadwick was then shown a security dossier in which secondnameplaceholder was accused of being a Soviet spy and that, having learned to fly at Los Alamos, he was suspected of wanting to join the Royal Air Force so that he could fly to Poland and defect to the Soviet Union.[27] In addition, he was accused of visiting someone in Santa Fe and leaving them a blank cheque to finance the formation of a communist cell.[22]secondnameplaceholder was able to show that much of the information within the dossier had been fabricated.[22] In addition, FBI records show that in 1950, secondnameplaceholder's friend in Santa Fe was tracked down in California, and she flatly denied the story; the cheque had never been cashed and had been left to pay for items not available in the UK during the war. In 1985, secondnameplaceholder recounted how a box containing "all my documents" went missing on a train ride from Washington D.C. to New York as he was leaving the country,[25] but the presence of large numbers of secondnameplaceholder's personal papers from Los Alamos now archived at the Churchill Archives Centre "is totally at odds with secondnameplaceholder's account of events".[28][29]
<h2>Nuclear fallout</h2>
secondnameplaceholder returned to Britain to become senior lecturer and acting director of research in nuclear physics at the University of Liverpool.[11] He naturalised as a British subject on 8 January 1946.[30] Most of his family had survived the war. With the help of a Polish man, his brother-in-law Mieczysław (Mietek) Pokorny had created false Polish Catholic identities for secondnameplaceholder's sister Ewa and niece Halina. Ewa, taking advantage of the fact that she was an ash blonde who, like secondnameplaceholder, spoke fluent Polish as well as Yiddish, smuggled the rest of the family out of the Warsaw Ghetto. Mietek, secondnameplaceholder's brother Mordecai (Michael) and Michael's wife Manya, secondnameplaceholder's mother Scheindel, and two Russian soldiers lived in a concealed bunker underneath a house near Otwock, in which Ewa and Halina lived with a Polish family. Displays of Polish anti-Semitism that she witnessed during the Warsaw Ghetto uprising embittered Ewa towards Poland, and she petitioned secondnameplaceholder to help the family emigrate to England. He therefore now accepted Chadwick's offer of British citizenship so he could help them escape from Poland.[31] They lived with him in London for some time before becoming established.[32] Halina would go on to graduate from Somerville College, Oxford, and University College London, and become an editor of the Dictionary of National Biography.[33]secondnameplaceholder felt betrayed by the use of atomic weapons against Japan, and gave a series of public lectures in which he called for a three-year moratorium on all atomic research.[22] secondnameplaceholder was determined that his research should have only peaceful ends, and so became interested in the medical and biological uses of radiation. In 1949, he became Professor of Physics at St Bartholomew's Hospital ("Barts"), London,[34][35] a teaching hospital associated with the University of London. He remained there for the rest of his career, becoming a professor emeritus in 1976.[36] He received his PhD from Liverpool in 1950, having written his thesis on the "Determination of a number of neutrons emitted from a source".[37] He also worked on several official bodies connected with nuclear physics, and arranged the Atom Train, a major travelling exhibition for schools on civil nuclear energy.[25]At St Bartholomew's, secondnameplaceholder worked on the effects of radiation on living organisms, especially on ageing and fertility. This led him to an interest in nuclear fallout, especially strontium-90 and the safe limits of ionising radiation. In 1955, he demonstrated that the contamination caused by the fallout after the Castle Bravo nuclear test at Bikini Atoll by the United States had been far greater than that stated officially.  Until then the official line had been that the growth in the strength of atomic bombs was not accompanied by an equivalent growth in radioactivity released.  Japanese scientists who had collected data from a fishing vessel, the Lucky Dragon, which had inadvertently been exposed to fallout, disagreed with this. secondnameplaceholder was able to deduce that the bomb had three stages and showed that the fission phase at the end of the explosion increased the amount of radioactivity by forty times. His paper was taken up by the media and contributed to the public debate that resulted in the ending of atmospheric tests by the Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.[38]
<h2>Peace work</h2>
secondnameplaceholder believed that scientists should always be concerned with the ethical consequences of their work.[39] He became one of the most prominent critics of the nuclear arms race, was the youngest signatory of the Russell–Einstein Manifesto in 1955, and chaired the press conference that launched it.  After the positive coverage of the manifesto, Cyrus Eaton offered to fund the influential Pugwash Conferences on Science and World Affairs, an international organisation that brought together scholars and public figures to work toward reducing the danger of armed conflict and to seek solutions to global security threats, particularly those related to nuclear warfare. With Bertrand Russell and others, secondnameplaceholder organised the first of these in 1957 and continued to work within their framework until his death. Despite the Iron Curtain and the Cold War, he advocated establishing links between scientists from the West and East. For this reason, the Pugwash conferences were viewed with suspicion. Initially the British government thought them little more than "Communist front gatherings".[40]However, he persuaded John Cockcroft, a member of the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority, to suggest who might be invited to the 1958 conference.  He successfully resisted a subsequent attempt to take over the conferences,[40] causing a Foreign Office official to write that "the difficulty is to get Prof. secondnameplaceholder to pay any attention to what we think ... He is no doubt jealous of his independence and scientific integrity", and that securing "a new organizer for the British delegation seems to be the first need, but I do not know if there is any hope of this."[40] By the early 1960s the Ministry of Defence thought that the Pugwash Conferences were "now a very respectable organization", and the Foreign Office stated that it had "official blessing" and that any breakthrough may well originate at such gatherings.[40] The Pugwash Conferences are credited with laying the ground work for the Partial Test Ban Treaty of 1963, the Nonproliferation Treaty of 1968, the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty of 1972, the Biological Weapons Convention of 1972 and the Chemical Weapons Convention of 1993.[4] In parallel with the Pugwash Conferences, he joined with Albert Einstein, Robert Oppenheimer, Bertrand Russell and other concerned scientists to found the World Academy of Art and Science, which was proposed by them in the mid-1950s and formally constituted in 1960.[41]
<h2>Later life</h2>
secondnameplaceholder retired from St Bartholomew's in 1976. In 1975 and 1976, he was Montague Visiting Professor of International Relations at the University of Edinburgh.[42][43] He believed that scientists have an individual moral responsibility and, just as the Hippocratic Oath provides a code of conduct for physicians, he thought that scientists should have their own code of moral conduct, a Hippocratic Oath for scientists.[39] During his tenure as president of the Pugwash conferences, secondnameplaceholder nominated Israeli nuclear technician Mordechai Vanunu for the Nobel Peace Prize every year from 1988 to 2004. Vanunu had disclosed the extent of Israel's nuclear weapons programme and consequently spent 18 years in prison, including more than 11 years in solitary confinement.[44]secondnameplaceholder campaigned ceaselessly against nuclear weapons. In an interview shortly before the 2004 US presidential election, he expressed his belief that the Russell–Einstein Manifesto still had "great relevance today, after 50 years, particularly in connection with the election of a president in the United States",[45] and above all, with respect to the potential pre-emptive use of nuclear weapons.[46] Central to his view of the world were the words of the Russell–Einstein Manifesto with which he concluded his acceptance lecture for the Nobel Prize in 1995:[47]  "Above all, remember your humanity".[48] He also served as editor-in-chief of the journal Physics in Medicine and Biology from 1960 to 1972.[11] He was the president of several institutions and professional associations and also a co-founder and member of the governing board of the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, as well as a member of the Advisory Committee on Medical Research of the World Health Organization.[11] secondnameplaceholder was a programme advisor to the BAFTA award-winning nuclear docudrama Threads, produced in 1984.[49]secondnameplaceholder suffered a stroke in 2004, and his health declined. He died of septicaemia at the Royal Free Hospital in Camden, London, on 31 August 2005.[6]
<h2>Awards and honours</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire in the 1965 New Year Honours.[50] He won the Albert Einstein Peace Prize in 1992, and was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) in 1995.[51] He was appointed a Knight Commander of the Order of St Michael and St George in the 1998 Birthday Honours for services to international understanding.[52] His certificate of election to the Royal Society readsecondnameplaceholder shared, with the Pugwash Conferences, the 1995 Nobel Peace Prize for efforts toward nuclear disarmament.[54] His citation read: "for efforts to diminish the part played by nuclear arms in international affairs and, in the longer run, to eliminate such arms."[3] Towards the end of his life, he was also elected honorary member of the International Association of Physics Students,[55] and the Jamnalal Bajaj Foundation of India awarded him the Jamnalal Bajaj Award in 1999.[56]
He was an honorary editorial board member for ‘Journal of Environment Peace’ published from the library of University of Toronto, now from Noble International University, edited by Professor Bob Ganguly and Professor Roger Hansell.A plaque commemorating firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, unveiled in 2017 in the presence of Polish Ambassador Arkady Rzegocki, can be found outside the offices of British Pugwash, on the corner of Bury Place and Great Russell Street in London.[57]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder SDB, GCL (born 3 February 1948) is an East Timorese Roman Catholic bishop. His religious life openly denounced the brutal Indonesian occupation of his country. In 1996, he shared the Nobel Peace Prize with José Ramos-Horta for working "towards a just and peaceful solution to the conflict in East Timor".firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder SDB, GCL (born 3 February 1948) is an East Timorese Roman Catholic bishop. His religious life openly denounced the brutal Indonesian occupation of his country. In 1996, he shared the Nobel Peace Prize with José Ramos-Horta for working "towards a just and peaceful solution to the conflict in East Timor".
<h2>Early life and religious vocation</h2>
The fifth child of Domingos Vaz Filipe and Ermelinda Baptista Filipe, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was born in the village of Wailakama, near Vemasse, on the north coast of Portuguese Timor. His father, a schoolteacher, died two years after Belo was born. His childhood years were spent in Catholic schools at Baucau and Ossu, before he proceeded to the Dare minor seminary outside Dili, from which he graduated in 1968. From 1969 until 1981, apart from periods of practical training (1974–1976) in East Timor and Macau, Belo was in Portugal and Rome where, having become a member of the Salesian Society, he studied philosophy and theology before being ordained a priest in 1980. Returning to East Timor in 1981, Belo became a teacher for 20 months, and later director for two months, at the Salesian College at Fatumaca.
<h2>Pastoral leadership</h2>
On the resignation of Martinho da Costa Lopes in 1983, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was appointed Apostolic Administrator of the Dili diocese, becoming head of the East Timor church and directly responsible to the Pope. On 6 February 1989, he was consecrated titular Bishop of Lorium.[5]Belo was the choice of the Vatican's Pro Nuncio in Jakarta and the Indonesian leaders because of his supposed submissiveness, but he was not the choice of the Timorese priests who did not attend his inauguration. However within only five months of his assuming office, he protested vehemently, in a sermon in the cathedral, against the brutalities of the Kraras massacre (1983) and condemned the many Indonesian arrests. The church was the only institution capable of communicating with the outside world, so with this in mind the new Apostolic Administrator started writing letters and building up overseas contacts, in spite of the isolation arising from the opposition of the Indonesians and the disinterest of most of the world.In February 1989 he wrote to the President of Portugal, the Pope, and the UN Secretary-General, calling for a UN referendum on the future of East Timor and for international help for the East Timorese, who were "dying as a people and a nation", but when the UN letter became public in April, he became even more of a target of the Indonesians. This precariousness increased when Belo gave sanctuary in his own home, as he did on various occasions, to youths escaping the Santa Cruz massacre (1991), and endeavoured to expose the numbers of victims killed.Belo's labours on behalf of the East Timorese and in pursuit of peace and reconciliation were internationally recognised when, along with José Ramos-Horta, he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in December 1996. Belo capitalised upon this honour through meetings with Bill Clinton of the United States and Nelson Mandela of South Africa. In 1995, he also won the John Humphrey Freedom Award from the Canadian human rights group Rights & Democracy.[6]
<h2>Resignation as Apostolic Administrator and new pastoral activity</h2>
In the aftermath of East Timorese independence on 20 May 2002, the pressure of events and the ongoing stress he endured began to show their effects on Belo's health. Pope John Paul II accepted his resignation as Apostolic Administrator of Dili on 26 November 2002.Following his resignation Belo travelled to Portugal for medical treatment. By the beginning of 2004, there were repeated calls for him to return to East Timor and to run for the office of president. However, in May 2004 he told Portuguese state-run television RTP, that he would not allow his name to be put up for nomination. "I have decided to leave politics to politicians," he stated. One month later, on 7 June 2004, Pascuál Chavez, rector major of the Salesian Society, announced from Rome that Belo, returned to health, would take up a new assignment. In agreement with the Holy See, he would go to Mozambique as a missionary, and live as a member of the Salesian Society in that country.In a statement released on 8 June, Belo said that, following two meetings in 2003 and in 2004 with the Prefect of the Congregation for the Evangelisation of Peoples, he would go on a mission to the Diocese of Maputo, the capital of Mozambique, as he had wanted to since his youth.[citation needed] He started in July 2004; the same year he was awarded an Honorary Doctorate from CEU Cardinal Herrera University.In February 2011 Belo received the Prize for Lusophonic Personality of the Year, given by MIL: Movimento Internacional Lusófono in the Lisbon Academy of Sciences.
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder Manuel secondnameplaceholder GColIH GCL (Portuguese pronunciation: [ʒuˈzɛ ˈʁɐ̃muz ˈɔɾtɐ]; born 26 December 1949) is an East Timorese politician who was the President of East Timor from 20 May 2007 to 20 May 2012. Previously he was Minister of Foreign Affairs from 2002 to 2006 and Prime Minister from 2006 to 2007. He is a co-recipient of the 1996 Nobel Peace Prize along with Carlos Filipe Ximenes Belo, for working "towards a just and peaceful solution to the conflict in East Timor".As a founder and former member of Fretilin, secondnameplaceholder served as the exiled spokesman for the East Timorese resistance during the years of the Indonesian occupation of East Timor (1975–1999). While he continued to work with Fretilin, secondnameplaceholder resigned from the party in 1988, becoming an independent politician.[1]After East Timor achieved independence in 2002, secondnameplaceholder was appointed as the country's first foreign minister. He served in this position until his resignation on 25 June 2006, amidst political turmoil. On 26 June, following the resignation of Prime Minister Mari Alkatiri, secondnameplaceholder was appointed as acting Prime Minister by President Xanana Gusmão. Two weeks later, on 10 July 2006, he was sworn in as the second Prime Minister of East Timor. He was elected as President in 2007. On 11 February 2008, secondnameplaceholder was shot during an assassination attempt.After leaving office as President in 2012, secondnameplaceholder was appointed as the United Nations' Special Representative and Head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) on 2 January 2013.
<h2>Early history and family</h2>
Of mestiço ethnicity,[2] secondnameplaceholder was born in 1949 in Dili, capital of East Timor, to a Timorese mother and a Portuguese father who had been exiled to what was then Portuguese Timor by the Salazar dictatorship. He was educated in a Catholic mission in the small village of Soibada, later chosen by Fretilin as headquarters after the Indonesian invasion. Of his eleven brothers and sisters, four were killed by the Indonesian military.secondnameplaceholder studied Public International Law at The Hague Academy of International Law in 1983 and at Antioch College in Yellow Springs, Ohio—where he completed a Master of Arts degree in Peace Studies—in 1984. He was trained in Human Rights Law at the International Institute of Human Rights in Strasbourg in 1983. He completed post-graduate courses in American foreign policy at Columbia University in 1983.[3][4] He is a Senior Associate Member of the University of Oxford's St Antony's College since 1987 and speaks fluently in five languages: Portuguese, English, French, Spanish, and the most commonly spoken East Timorese language, Tetum.[5]He is divorced from Ana Pessoa Pinto, East Timor's Minister for State and Internal Administration, with whom he has a son, Loro Horta, who was born in exile in Mozambique.[6]
<h2>Political career</h2>
He was actively involved in the development of political awareness in Portuguese Timor, which caused him to be exiled for two years in 1970–71 to Portuguese East Africa. His grandfather, before him, had also been exiled, from Portugal to the Azores Islands, then Cape Verde, Portuguese Guinea and finally to Portuguese Timor.A moderate in the emerging Timorese nationalist leadership, he was appointed Foreign Minister in the "Democratic Republic of East Timor" government proclaimed by the pro-independence parties in November 1975. When appointed minister, secondnameplaceholder was only 25 years old. secondnameplaceholder left East Timor three days before the Indonesian troops invaded to plead the Timorese case before the UN.secondnameplaceholder arrived in New York to address the UN Security Council and urge them to take action in the face of the Indonesian occupation during which an estimated 102,000 East Timorese would die.[7] secondnameplaceholder was the Permanent Representative of Fretilin to the UN for the next ten years. His friends at that time mentioned that he arrived in the United States with a total of $25 in his pocket. His pecuniary situation was often straitened in that period; he survived partly by grace of Americans who admired his politics and his determination. Further, he was obliged to travel worldwide to explain his party's position.In 1993, the Rafto Prize was awarded to the people of East Timor. Foreign-minister-in-exile secondnameplaceholder represented his nation at the prize ceremony. In May 1994, Philippine President Fidel Ramos (no relation), bowing to pressure from Jakarta, tried to ban an international conference on East Timor in Manila and blacklisted secondnameplaceholder, with the Thai government following suit later that year by declaring him persona non grata.[8]In December 1996, secondnameplaceholder shared the Nobel Peace Prize with fellow Timorese, Bishop Ximenes Belo. The Nobel Committee chose to honour the two laureates for their "sustained efforts to hinder the oppression of a small people", hoping that "this award will spur efforts to find a diplomatic solution to the conflict of East Timor based on the people's right to self-determination". The Committee considered secondnameplaceholder "the leading international spokesman for East Timor's cause since 1975".[9]secondnameplaceholder played a leading role in negotiating the institutional foundations for independence. He led the Timorese delegation at an important joint workshop with UNTAET on 1 March 2000 to tease out a new strategy, and identify institutional needs. The outcome was an agreed blueprint for a joint administration with executive powers, including leaders of the National Congress for Timorese Reconstruction (CNRT). Further details were worked out in a conference in May 2000. The Special Representative of the UN Secretary-General in East Timor, Sérgio Vieira de Mello, presented the new blueprint to a donor conference in Lisbon,[10] on 22 June 2000, and to the UN Security Council on 27 June 2000.[11] On 12 July 2000, the NCC adopted a regulation establishing a Transitional Cabinet composed of four East Timorese and four UNTAET representatives.[12] The revamped joint administration successfully laid the institutional foundations for independence, and on 27 September 2002, East Timor joined the United Nations. secondnameplaceholder was its first Foreign Minister.On 3 June 2006, secondnameplaceholder added the post of Interim Minister of Defense to his portfolio as Foreign Minister, in the wake of the resignations of the previous minister.[13] He resigned as both Foreign and Defence Minister on 25 June 2006, announcing, "I do not wish to be associated with the present government or with any government involving Alkatiri."[14] Prime Minister Alkatiri had been under pressure to resign his position in place of President Xanana Gusmão, but in a 25 June meeting, leaders of the Fretilin party agreed to keep Alkatiri as Prime Minister; secondnameplaceholder resigned immediately following this decision.[15] Foreign Minister of Australia Alexander Downer expressed his personal disappointment at secondnameplaceholder's resignation.[16] Following Alkatiri's resignation on 26 June, secondnameplaceholder withdrew his resignation to contest the prime ministership and served in the position on a temporary basis until a successor to Alkatiri was named.[17] On 8 July 2006, secondnameplaceholder himself was appointed Prime Minister by President Gusmão.[18] He was sworn in on 10 July.Before his appointment as Prime Minister, secondnameplaceholder was considered a possible candidate to succeed Kofi Annan as United Nations Secretary-General.[19] He dropped out of the race in order to serve as East Timor's Prime Minister, but he has indicated that he might run for the UN position at some time in the future: "I can wait five years if I am really interested in the job in 2012. I would be interested in that."[20]In an interview with Al Jazeera broadcast on 22 February 2007, secondnameplaceholder said that he would run for president in the April 2007 election.[21] On 25 February 2007, secondnameplaceholder formally announced his candidacy. He received the support of Gusmão, who was not running for re-election.[22] In an interview with Global South Development Magazine, secondnameplaceholder revealed that Mahatma Gandhi was his greatest hero.[23]In the first round of the election, held on 9 April, secondnameplaceholder took second place with 21.81% of the vote; he and Fretilin candidate Francisco Guterres, who took first place, then participated in the second round of the election in May.[24] The full results of the runoff elections were made public by East Timor's National Electoral Committee spokeswoman, Maria Angelina Sarmento, on 11 May, and secondnameplaceholder won with 69% of the vote.[25]He was inaugurated as President of East Timor in a ceremony at the parliament house in Dili on 20 May 2007.[26]  He had resigned as Prime Minister the day before and was succeeded by Estanislau da Silva.During the first round of the presidential elections of 2012, held on 17 March, secondnameplaceholder, who was eligible for a second and final term as president, took third place with 19.43% of the vote behind the presidential candidates Francisco Guterres with 27.28% and Taur Matan Ruak 24.17% of the vote. He admitted defeat,[27] and his term as president ended on 19 May, with the inauguration of Taur Matan Ruak as his successor.[28][29]On 11 February 2008, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was shot in an assassination attempt. In the gun skirmish, one of secondnameplaceholder's guards was wounded, and two rebel soldiers, including rebel leader Alfredo Reinado, were killed.[30][31] secondnameplaceholder was treated at a New Zealand Military base in Dili before being transferred to the Royal Darwin Hospital in Australia for further treatment. Doctors thought that he had been shot two or three times with the most serious injury being to his right lung.[32] His condition was listed as critical but stable.[33] He was placed in an induced coma on full life support,[34] and regained consciousness on 21 February.[35]  A message from secondnameplaceholder, still recovering in Darwin, was broadcast on 12 March. In this message, he thanked his supporters and Australia and said that he had "been very well looked after". A spokesman said that his condition was improving and that he had started taking short daily walks for exercise.[36]secondnameplaceholder was released from the Royal Darwin Hospital on 19 March, although he said that he would stay in Australia for physical therapy for "a few more weeks". He also said on this occasion that he had remained conscious following the shooting and "remember[ed] every detail", describing how he was taken for treatment.[37] On 17 April, secondnameplaceholder returned to Dili from Darwin. He gave a press conference at the airport in which he urged the remaining rebels in the mountains to surrender.[38]
<h2>Post-presidency</h2>
Following the 2012 Guinea-Bissau coup d'état, he offered to mediate the conflict. As of 31 January 2013 he is the UN special envoy to the country.[39]He is the author of the book Words of Hope in Troubled Times.[40]
<h2>Other activities</h2>
secondnameplaceholder is a frequent speaker, along with other Nobel Peace Prize Laureates, at Peacejam conferences.[citation needed] He has served as Chairman of the Advisory Board for TheCommunity.com, a web site for peace and human rights, since 2000. In 2001 he gathered the post 9/11 statements of 28 Nobel Peace Prize Laureates on the web site,[41] and has spearheaded other peace initiatives with his fellow Nobel Laureates.secondnameplaceholder supported the U.S. invasion and occupation of Iraq and condemned the anti-American tone of its detractors as "hypocritical".[42]  In the 1990s he had supported the cause of Kurdish people in Iraq.[43]In May 2009 secondnameplaceholder stated that he would ask the International Criminal Court to investigate the ruling junta of Myanmar if they continue to detain fellow Nobel Laureate Aung San Suu Kyi.[44] However, by August 2010, he had softened his views on Myanmar, warmly receiving the Myanmar Foreign Minister Nyan Win, and said that he wanted to improve relations and seek strong commercial ties with Myanmar.[45]secondnameplaceholder is an early signatory of the International Simultaneous Policy (SIMPOL) which seeks to end the usual deadlock in tackling global issues. Lucas became a signatory in 2006.[46]On 5 August 2009, he attended the funeral of the former President of the Philippines Corazon Aquino. He was the only foreign head of state to attend.[47] On 30 June 2010, he attended the inauguration of Benigno S. Aquino III, the 15th President of the Philippines. He was, again, the only head of state who attended the inauguration and the first dignitary to arrive in the Philippines for the inauguration..[citation needed] The two attendances effectively solidified East Timorese-Filipino diplomatic relations, to an extent where Filipino support for East Timorese ascension to ASEAN favorably increased.[citation needed]secondnameplaceholder is a Member of the Global Leadership Foundation, an organization which works to support democratic leadership, prevent and resolve conflict through mediation and promote good governance in the form of democratic institutions, open markets, human rights and the rule of law. It does so by making available, discreetly and in confidence, the experience of former leaders to today’s national leaders. It is a not-for-profit organization composed of former heads of government, senior governmental and international organization officials who work closely with Heads of Government on governance-related issues of concern to them.In August 2017, ten Nobel Peace Prize laureates, including secondnameplaceholder, urged Saudi Arabia to stop the executions of 14 young people for participating in the 2011–12 Saudi Arabian protests.[48]He is also a television presenter of Horta Show in Radio-Televisão Timor Leste.
<h2>Awards</h2>
The Roman Catholic bishop Ximenes Belo of East Timor and secondnameplaceholder were jointly awarded the 1996 Nobel Peace Prize for their efforts.
<h2>Depictions in Film</h2>
The 2000 documentary The Diplomat, directed by Tom Zubrycki, follows secondnameplaceholder in the period from 1998 to his return to East Timor in 2000.[53][54] secondnameplaceholder is played by Oscar Isaac in the 2009 film Balibo.[55] The film tells the story of the Balibo Five and the events preceding the Indonesian occupation of East Timor.[56]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (born October 9, 1950) is an American political activist known for her work in banning anti-personnel landmines, her defense of human rights (especially those of women), and her efforts to promote new understandings of security in today's world. She was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1997[1] for her work toward the banning and clearing of anti-personnel mines.
<h2>Education</h2>
secondnameplaceholder earned a Master in International Relations from the Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies (a division of Johns Hopkins University) in Washington, D.C. (1984), an MA in teaching Spanish and English as a second language from the School for International Training (now SIT Graduate Institute) in Brattleboro, Vermont (1976), and a BA from the University of Vermont (1972).
<h2>Advocacy</h2>
secondnameplaceholder served as the founding coordinator of the International Campaign to Ban Landmines (ICBL) from early 1992 until February 1998. Before that work, she spent eleven years on various projects related to the wars in Nicaragua and El Salvador, where, according to the Encyclopedia of Human Rights, she "spent the 1980s performing life-threatening human rights work."[2]In an unprecedented cooperative effort with governments, UN bodies and the International Committee of the Red Cross, secondnameplaceholder served as a chief strategist and spokesperson for the ICBL, which she developed from two non-governmental organizations (NGOs) with a staff of one – herself – to an international powerhouse of 1,300 NGOs in ninety countries.From its small beginning and official launch in 1992, secondnameplaceholder and the ICBL dramatically achieved the campaign's goal of an international treaty banning antipersonnel landmines during a diplomatic conference held in Oslo in September 1997. The Ottawa Treaty that banned land-mines is credited to her and the ICBL.[1] Three weeks later, she and the ICBL were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. At that time, she became the tenth woman – and third American woman – in its almost hundred-year history to receive the Prize.In November 2004, after discussions with Iranian Peace Laureates Dr. Shirin Ebadi and Professor Wangari Maathai of Kenya, secondnameplaceholder established the Nobel Women’s Initiative which was launched in January 2006. secondnameplaceholder has since served as its Chair. This initiative brought together six of the female Peace Laureates, the women seek to use their influence to promote the work of women working for peace with justice and equality.[3] (Aung San Suu Kyi is an honorary member.)In 2020, secondnameplaceholder called upon Chevron corporation to pay cleanup costs to the residents of the Lago Agrio oil field which were awarded in 2011 and have been in litigation ever since.[4]secondnameplaceholder is quoted as saying, "The image of peace with a dove flying over a rainbow and people holding hands singing kumbaya ends up infantilizing people who believe that sustainable peace is possible. If you think that singing and looking at a rainbow will suddenly make peace appear then you're not capable of meaningful thought, or understanding the difficulties of the world."[5][6]
<h2>Academic career</h2>
Since 2007, secondnameplaceholder has been the Sam and Cele Keeper Professor in Peace and Social Justice in the Graduate College of Social Work at the University of Houston. Before that she had been a Distinguished Visiting Professor of Global Justice at the College since 2003.
<h2>Recognition</h2>
secondnameplaceholder continues to be recognized for her contributions to human rights and global security. She is the recipient of fifteen honorary degrees. In 2004, in its first such listing, she was named by Forbes magazine as one of the 100 most powerful women in the world. She is one of the female Nobel Prize laureates to be recognized as a "Woman of the Year" by Glamour magazine – which has also honoured Hillary Clinton, Katie Couric and Barbara Walters.
<h2>Publications</h2>
secondnameplaceholder work includes articles for magazines and newspapers like for example the Wall Street Journal, International Herald Tribune, The Independent (UK), The Irish Times, The Toronto Globe and Mail, The LA Times, La Jornada (Mexico), The Review of the International Red Cross, Columbia University's Journal of Politics and Society).She added several chapters to numerous books:
(!!)Article(!/!)
William firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, Baron secondnameplaceholder, PC (born 15 October 1944), is a British politician who was the first First Minister of Northern Ireland from 1998 to 2002, and the leader of the Ulster Unionist Party (UUP) from 1995 to 2005.[2][3] He was also the Member of Parliament for Upper Bann from 1990 to 2005 and the Member of the Legislative Assembly (MLA) for Upper Bann from 1998 to 2007. In 2006, he was made a life peer in the House of Lords and a year later left the UUP to join the Conservative Party.secondnameplaceholder began his career teaching law at The Queen's University of Belfast in the 1970s, during which time he began to get involved with the paramilitary-linked Vanguard Progressive Unionist Party. He was elected to the Northern Ireland Constitutional Convention in 1975, and joined the UUP in 1978 after the VPUP disbanded.[3] Remaining at Queen's University, he continued his academic career until being elected as the MP for Upper Bann in 1990. In 1995 he was unexpectedly elected as the leader of the UUP.[3] He was instrumental in the negotiations that led to the Good Friday Agreement in 1998, and (along with John Hume) won the Nobel Peace Prize that year for his efforts. He was later elected to become the first First Minister of Northern Ireland, although his tenure was turbulent and frequently interrupted by disagreements over the timetable for Provisional Irish Republican Army decommissioning.After being defeated at the 2005 general election, secondnameplaceholder resigned the leadership of the UUP soon afterwards. In June 2006, he accepted a life peerage in the House of Lords, taking the title of Baron secondnameplaceholder, of Lisnagarvey in the County of Antrim.[4] He did not stand again for the Assembly, which finally reconvened in 2007, instead leaving the UUP to join the Conservative Party.[5]
<h2>Early life and education</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was the son of William and Ivy secondnameplaceholder, lower-middle class Presbyterians who lived in Bangor, County Down.[6][7] He attended Bangor Grammar School (1956–63).[8]
secondnameplaceholder's paternal grandfather George was born in Easkey, County Sligo, to parents William secondnameplaceholder and Mary Burns.He studied at Queen's University of Belfast (QUB) from 1964 to 1968, where he was awarded the McKane Medal for Jurisprudence.[8] He received a first class honours degree (the first at Queen's in three years), becoming a Bachelor of Laws (LL.B).[9][10]
<h2>Early career</h2>
secondnameplaceholder qualified as a barrister in 1969. He began that year as a Queen's University of Belfast lecturer, subsequently becoming Assistant Dean of the law faculty from 1973 to 1975, a Senior Lecturer in 1977, and Head of the Department of Commercial and Property Law from 1981 to 1989.[8][11][12][13] He resigned from the university in 1990 when he was elected to Parliament.[8]In 1983, as he sat in his office at the university, he heard gunshots which turned out to be those of IRA killers of Edgar Graham, a friend and fellow law professor.[13] He was asked to identify the body.[13] In 1994 he was told by the Royal Ulster Constabulary that he had been targeted for assassination.[13]secondnameplaceholder became involved with the right-wing, paramilitary-linked Vanguard Unionist Progressive Party (known as Vanguard) in the early 1970s. He ran unsuccessfully for the party in the 1973 Assembly election for North Down, coming last.[14] In 1974, he was a legal adviser to the Ulster Workers' Council during the successful UWC strike against the Sunningdale Agreement.[15]He was elected to the Northern Ireland Constitutional Convention in 1975 as a Vanguard member for Belfast South, and for a time he served as the party's joint deputy leader, along with the Ulster Defence Association's Glenn Barr.[16] The party had been established by Bill Craig to oppose sharing power with Irish Nationalists, and to prevent closer ties with the Republic of Ireland; however secondnameplaceholder was one of those to back Craig when the party split over Craig's proposal to allow voluntary power sharing with the SDLP.He joined the mainstream Ulster Unionist Party (UUP) in 1978 after Vanguard disbanded, and was elected one of the four party secretaries.[10][16] He served as Vice Chairman of the Lagan Valley Unionist Association from 1983 to 1985, and was named chairman in 1985.[11] He served as chairman of the UUP Legal Committee from 1989 to 1995 and as honorary secretary of the Ulster Unionist Council in 1990–96.[11]He was elected to Parliament with 58% of the vote in a by-election in Upper Bann in 1990.[16][17][18] He was one of the few British politicians who urged support for the government of Bosnia and Herzegovina during the civil war in the 1990s.[citation needed]
<h2>Leader of the Ulster Unionist Party</h2>
On 8 September 1995, secondnameplaceholder unexpectedly won election as Leader of the UUP, defeating the front-runner John Taylor and three other candidates.[12][19]secondnameplaceholder's election as Leader came in the aftermath of his role in the Drumcree conflict, in which he led a controversial 1995 Orange Order Protestant march, amidst Nationalist protest, down the predominantly Catholic nationalist Garvaghy Road in Portadown, County Armagh.[6][12] secondnameplaceholder and Democratic Unionist Party Leader Ian Paisley walked hand-in-hand as the march, banned since 1997, proceeded down the road.[20] Many Irish Catholics viewed it as insensitive, while many Protestants felt that it was a sign that secondnameplaceholder was defending them.[12]Shortly after the election, secondnameplaceholder became the first UUP Leader in 30 years (since Terence O'Neill) to meet with the Taoiseach in Dublin.[12] In 1997, he became the first unionist leader since the partition of Ireland in 1921 to agree to negotiate with Sinn Féin.[21]Later, in the All-Party negotiations, he led the UUP delegation and sat at the table with Sinn Féin, though in the eight months of the negotiations he never spoke directly to their leader, Gerry Adams.[6][11] The talks were successful, culminating in the Belfast Agreement of 10 April 1998, which resulted in power-sharing with Nationalists.[10][11] On 22 May 1998, voters in Northern Ireland approved the agreement, with 71 per cent in favour.[11]secondnameplaceholder was appointed to the Privy Council of the United Kingdom in the 1998 New Year Honours.[22][23]
<h2>First Minister of Northern Ireland</h2>
secondnameplaceholder at first opposed the appointment of former U.S. Senator George Mitchell as the chairman of multi-party talks, but eventually accepted him. The talks resulted in the Good Friday Agreement (GFA) of April 1998.[24] secondnameplaceholder was subsequently seen as instrumental in getting his party to accept the accord.[25]secondnameplaceholder was elected on 25 June 1998 as a Member of the Northern Ireland Assembly for Upper Bann.[11] He was elected First Minister of Northern Ireland on 1 July 1998.[11]Arguments over the extent of Provisional Irish Republican Army decommissioning led to repeated disruptions during secondnameplaceholder's tenure as First Minister. In particular:In 1998, Tony Blair announced a new judicial inquiry, the Bloody Sunday Inquiry, into the killing of 13 unarmed civil rights marchers in Derry in 1972. A previous investigation, the Widgery Tribunal, into the same event had been discredited. During the debate in the House of Commons, secondnameplaceholder was one of few dissenting voices. He said "I am sorry to have to say to the Prime Minister that I think that the hope expressed by the Honourable Member for Foyle [John Hume] that this will be part of the healing process is likely to be misplaced. Opening old wounds like this is likely to do more harm than good. The basic facts of the situation are known and not open to dispute."[28] Reporting in 2010, the Saville Inquiry confirmed that all of the 13 killings and 13 woundings were unjustified.[29]
<h2>Peerage</h2>
At the general elections of 2005, secondnameplaceholder was defeated in Upper Bann by the Democratic Unionist Party's firstnameplaceholder Simpson in his bid for re-election to Parliament in Westminster. The Ulster Unionist Party retained only one seat in Parliament (out of 18 in Northern Ireland) after the 2005 general election, and secondnameplaceholder resigned the party leadership on 7 May 2005.On 11 April 2006, it was announced that secondnameplaceholder would take a seat in the House of Lords as a working life peer.[30] On 21 May 2006 it was announced that he had chosen the geographical designation Lisnagarvey, the original name for his adopted home town of Lisburn. Subsequently, on 2 June 2006, he was created Baron secondnameplaceholder, of Lisnagarvey in the County of Antrim.[31]On 18 December 2006, he announced that he would be standing down from the Northern Ireland Assembly at the next election.[32]secondnameplaceholder was named an Honorary Patron of the University Philosophical Society, Trinity College, Dublin.[citation needed]On 17 April 2007, secondnameplaceholder announced he had decided to join the Conservative Party in order to have greater influence in politics in the United Kingdom.[5] At the same time, however, he stated that he did not intend to campaign against the Ulster Unionist Party, and proposed the idea of a future alliance between the Conservatives and the Ulster Unionists, similar to that which had existed prior to 1974 and the fallout of the Sunningdale Agreement. This idea became reality with the formation of the electoral alliance of Ulster Conservatives and Unionists in late 2008. It was reported that if the Conservatives won the 2010 general election, secondnameplaceholder would receive a "significant" ministerial role, possibly in the Cabinet.[33] In the event, however, secondnameplaceholder was not offered any governmental or front bench position following the formation of the Conservative–Liberal Democrat coalition government.In May 2010, secondnameplaceholder joined the Friends of Israel Initiative, a non-Jewish international project supporting Israel's right to exist. The initiative, started by former prime minister of Spain José María Aznar, also included former United States Ambassador to the United Nations John R. Bolton, British historian Andrew Roberts, and former Peruvian president Alejandro Toledo.[34] On 29 January 2013, secondnameplaceholder and Aznar co-wrote an article in The Times condemning Hezbollah and calling on European governments to list it as a terrorist organisation.[35]In 2016, secondnameplaceholder supported the Leave side in the UK referendum on EU membership. He said that if he had ever had any doubts about the issue, "his eight years on the EU Select Committees in the House of Lords – which scrutinise the EU's operations – had convinced him of the need to cut ties with Brussels". He cited a study which found that economic growth in the UK reduced after the decision to enter the Common Market, and reduced further when the UK went into the Single Market.[36]On 14 June 2010, secondnameplaceholder was appointed as an observer to the Israeli special independent public Turkel Commission of Inquiry into the Gaza flotilla raid.[37][38]The Commission investigated whether Israel's actions in preventing the arrival of ships in Gaza were in accordance with international law.[38] It focused among other things on the security considerations for imposing a naval blockade on the Gaza Strip and the conformity of the naval blockade with the rules of international law; the conformity of the actions during the raid to principles of international law; and the actions taken by those who organised and participated in the flotilla, and their identities.[38]On the commission were former Israeli Supreme Court Justice, Jacob Turkel, and former Technion University President, Amos Horev, as well two other members added in July 2010. (Bar Ilan University Professor of International Law Shabtai Rosenne also served on the commission from its establishment until his death on 21 September 2010.[39]) In addition, the commission had two foreign observers, secondnameplaceholder and former head of the Canadian military's judiciary, Judge Advocate General, Ken Watkin, who took part in hearings and discussions, but did not vote on the final conclusions.[40][41] The panel, in January 2011, concluded both Israel's naval blockade of Gaza and the interception of the flotilla "were found to be legally pursuant to the rules of international law".[42]
<h2>Personal life</h2>
secondnameplaceholder's first marriage, to Heather McComb in August 1968, ended in divorce in 1976. There were no children from his first marriage. secondnameplaceholder married a former student, Daphne Elizabeth (née Orr), in August 1978.[citation needed] They have two sons and two daughters (Richard, Victoria, Nicholas, and Sarah).[7] Lady secondnameplaceholder served as a member of the Equality Commission for Northern Ireland, and later the Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission, before standing unsuccessfully in the UK parliamentary election of May 2010 for the Ulster Conservatives and Unionists.[citation needed]His son Nicholas is active within the Ulster Unionist Party.[citation needed] In 2016 Nicholas secondnameplaceholder was co-opted to replace Alexander Redpath as a Councillor representing Downshire West on Lisburn and Castlereagh City Council.[citation needed]In July 2019, he admitted that he was "forced" to change his position on same-sex marriage and partnerships after voting against them, because of his lesbian daughter Vicky who married her girlfriend Rosalind Stephens in Scotland in 2017. He told peers in the House of Lords "I cannot change that, and I cannot now go around saying that I am opposed to it because I acquiesced to it. There we are."[43][44][45]
<h2>Honours</h2>
In October 1998, secondnameplaceholder and John Hume were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for their efforts to find a peaceful solution to the conflict in Northern Ireland.[46] The Nobel Institute noted:At a ceremony in Paris on 8 December 1999, secondnameplaceholder was appointed an Officier in the Légion d'Honneur by the French Government.[47]In 2002, secondnameplaceholder was awarded the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement.[48]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder KCSG (18 January 1937 – 3 August 2020) was an Irish nationalist politician from Northern Ireland, widely regarded as one of the most important figures in the recent political history of Ireland, as one of the architects of the Northern Ireland peace process.A native of Derry, he was a founding member of the Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP), and served as its second leader from 1979 to 2001. He also served as a Member of the European Parliament, and a Member of the UK Parliament, as well as a member of the Northern Ireland Assembly.secondnameplaceholder was co-recipient of the 1998 Nobel Peace Prize with David Trimble, and also received both the Gandhi Peace Prize and the Martin Luther King Award. He is the only person to receive the three major peace awards.In 2012, Pope Benedict XVI made secondnameplaceholder a Knight Commander of the Papal Order of St. Gregory the Great.[4]
He was named "Ireland's Greatest" in a 2010 public poll by Irish national broadcaster RTÉ to find the greatest person in Ireland's history.[5]
<h2>Early life and education</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born in 1937 in Derry, the son of Anne (née Doherty) and Samuel secondnameplaceholder.[6] He had a mostly Irish Catholic background; though his great-grandfather was a Presbyterian immigrant into County Donegal from Scotland.[7] secondnameplaceholder was a student at St Columb's College and at St Patrick's College, Maynooth, the leading Catholic seminary in Ireland and a recognised college of the National University of Ireland, where he intended to study for the priesthood. Among his teachers was the future Tomás Cardinal Ó Fiaich, a future Primate of All Ireland.[8]secondnameplaceholder did not complete his clerical studies but did obtain an M.A. degree in French and history from the college in 1958, and then returned home to his native Derry, where he became a teacher. He was a founding member of the Credit Union movement in the city and was chair of the University for Derry Committee in 1965, an unsuccessful fight to have Northern Ireland's second university established in Derry in the mid-1960s.[9] secondnameplaceholder became the youngest ever President of the Irish League of Credit Unions at age 27. He served in the role from 1964 to 1968. He once said that "all the things I've been doing, it's the thing I'm proudest of because no movement has done more good for the people of Ireland, north and south, than the credit union movement."[10]secondnameplaceholder became a leading figure in the civil rights movement in the late 1960s along with people such as Hugh Logue.[11] secondnameplaceholder was a prominent figure in the Derry Citizens' Action Committee. The DCAC was set up in the wake of 5 October 1968 march through Derry which had caused much attention to be drawn towards the situation in Northern Ireland. The purpose of the DCAC was to make use of the publicity surrounding recent events to bring to light grievances in Derry that had been suppressed by the Unionist Government for years. The DCAC, unlike Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association (NICRA), was aimed specifically at a local campaign, improving the situation in Derry for everyone, and maintaining a peaceful stance.[12]  The committee also had a Stewards Association that was there to prevent any violence at marches or sit-downs.[13]
<h2>Political career</h2>
secondnameplaceholder became an Independent Nationalist member of the Parliament of Northern Ireland in 1969 at the height of the civil rights campaign. He was elected to the Northern Ireland Assembly in 1973, and served as Minister of Commerce in the short-lived power-sharing Executive in 1974.[14] He stood unsuccessfully for the Westminster Parliament for the Londonderry constituency in October 1974, and was elected for Foyle in 1983.[15]In October 1971 he joined four Westminster MPs in a 48-hour hunger strike to protest at the internment without trial of hundreds of suspected Irish republicans. State papers that have been released under the 30 year rule that an Irish diplomat eight years later in 1979 believed secondnameplaceholder supported the return of internment.[16]In 1977, secondnameplaceholder challenged a regulation under the Civil Authorities (Special Powers) Act (Northern Ireland) 1922 which allowed any soldier to disperse an assembly of three or more people. The Lord Chief Justice of Northern Ireland, Lord Lowry, held that the regulation was ultra vires under Section 4 of the Government of Ireland Act 1920 which forbade the Parliament of Northern Ireland to make laws in respect of the army.[17]A founding member of the Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP), he succeeded Gerry Fitt as its leader in 1979.[18]  He also served as one of Northern Ireland's three Members of the European Parliament and served on the faculty of Boston College, from which he received an honorary degree in 1995.[19]secondnameplaceholder was directly involved in secret talks with the British government and Sinn Féin, in an effort to bring Sinn Féin to the discussion table openly. The talks are speculated[20] to have led directly to the Anglo-Irish Agreement in 1985.[21]The vast majority of unionists rejected the agreement and staged a massive and peaceful public rally in Belfast City Centre to demonstrate their distaste. Many Republicans and nationalists also rejected it, as they had seen it as not going far enough.[22] secondnameplaceholder, however, continued dialogue with both governments and Sinn Féin. The "secondnameplaceholder–Adams process" eventually delivered the 1994 IRA ceasefire which ultimately provided the relatively peaceful backdrop against which the Good Friday agreement was brokered.[21]
<h2>Reputation</h2>
secondnameplaceholder is credited as being the thinker behind many political developments in Northern Ireland, from the power-sharing Sunningdale Agreement to the Anglo-Irish Agreement and the Belfast Agreement.[citation needed] He won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1998 alongside the then-leader of the Ulster Unionist Party, David Trimble.[23]When David Trimble became First Minister, it was expected that secondnameplaceholder would take the role of Deputy First Minister, being the leader of the second largest party, the SDLP. Instead, this role was handed to Séamus Mallon, also of the SDLP. Some political journalists cited a bad working relationship between secondnameplaceholder and Trimble, despite the two men collecting the Nobel Prize together.[24]On his retirement from the SDLP leadership in 2001, secondnameplaceholder was praised across the political divide, even by his long-time opponent, fellow MP and MEP, the Rev. Ian Paisley.[25][failed verification] secondnameplaceholder held the Tip O'Neill Chair in Peace Studies at the University of Ulster, currently funded by The Ireland Funds.[26]
<h2>Retirement</h2>
On 4 February 2004, secondnameplaceholder announced his complete retirement from politics and was succeeded by Mark Durkan as SDLP leader.[27]  He did not contest the 2004 European election (when his seat was won by Bairbre de Brún of Sinn Féin),[28] nor did he run in the 2005 general election, in which Mark Durkan retained the Foyle constituency for the SDLP.[29]secondnameplaceholder and his wife, Pat, continued to be active in promoting European integration, issues around global poverty and the Credit Union movement. He was also a supporter of the Campaign for the Establishment of a United Nations Parliamentary Assembly, an organisation which campaigns for democratic reformation of the United Nations.[30] In retirement, he continued to speak publicly, including a visit to Seton Hall University in New Jersey in 2005, the first Summer University of Democracy of the Council of Europe (Strasbourg, 10–14 July 2006), and at St Thomas University, Fredericton, New Brunswick, Canada, on 18 July 2007. A building added to the National University of Ireland, Maynooth, was named after him. secondnameplaceholder held the position of Club President of his local football team, Derry City F.C., which he supported all his life.[31] He was a patron of the children's charity Plan International Ireland.[32][33]During his final years secondnameplaceholder suffered from dementia, which first started displaying symptoms in the late 1990s.[34]
<h2>Death</h2>
secondnameplaceholder died in the early hours of 3 August 2020 at a nursing home in Derry, at the age of 83.[35] On his death, former Labour leader and Prime Minister Tony Blair said: "firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was a political titan; a visionary who refused to believe the future had to be the same as the past."[36] The Dalai Lama said on Twitter: "firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's deep conviction in the power of dialogue and negotiations to resolve conflict was unwavering... It was his leadership and his faith in the power of negotiations that enabled the 1998 Good Friday Agreement to be reached. His steady persistence set an example for us all to follow."[37]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (Korean: 김대중; Hanja: 金大中; Korean pronunciation: [kim.dɛ.dʑuŋ]; 6 January 1924 – 18 August 2009), was a South Korean politician who served as President of South Korea from 1998 to 2003. He was a 2000 Nobel Peace Prize recipient for his work for democracy and human rights in South Korea and in East Asia in general, and for peace and reconciliation with North Korea and Japan. He is also the only Korean to have won the Nobel Prize to date.[2] He was sometimes referred to as "the Nelson Mandela of Asia".[3] firstnameplaceholder was the first opposition candidate to win the presidency.
<h2>Early life</h2>
firstnameplaceholder Dae-Jung was born on 6 January 1924,[4] but he later edited his birth date to 3 December 1925 to avoid conscription under Japanese colonial rule. firstnameplaceholder was the second of seven children. firstnameplaceholder was born in Sinan in what was then the Jeolla province; the city is now in Jeollanam-do. firstnameplaceholder's family had moved to the nearby port city of Mokpo so that he could finish high school. He had to change his name to Japanese Toyota Taichū (豊田大中), because Japan had conducted name-changing program from Korean names to Japanese names, during the Japanese colonial period.[citation needed]firstnameplaceholder graduated from Mokpo Commercial Middle School in 1943, and then he worked as a clerk at a Japanese-managed shipping company. After Korea was liberated by the Allied Forces, he was elected its manager. During the Korean War, firstnameplaceholder was captured by North Korean communists and was sentenced to be shot, though he managed to escape.[5]
<h2>Early political career</h2>
firstnameplaceholder disposed his business, and entered politics in earnest from Mokpo in 1954 during the administration of Korea's first president, Syngman Rhee. From 1954 to 1960, he was defeated four times in elections. Although he was elected as a representative for the National Assembly on May 14, Park Chung-hee seized power in the May 16 coup, who later assumed dictatorial powers, voided the elections.[5] He was able to win a seat in the House in the subsequent elections in 1963 and 1967 and went on to become an eminent opposition leader. As such, he was the natural opposition candidate for the country's presidential election in 1971. He nearly defeated Park despite several handicaps on his candidacy that were imposed by the ruling regime.[6]A very talented orator, firstnameplaceholder could command unwavering loyalty among his supporters. His staunchest support came from the Jeolla region, where he reliably garnered upwards of 95% of the popular vote, a record that has remained unsurpassed in South Korean politics.While campaigning for legislative elections in 1971, a month after the presidential election, a truck turned directly into the path of his car and seriously injured him and his two aides. He was left with a permanent limp for the rest of his life. It has been suspected that the collision was an assassination attempt by the Park regime.[7]
<h2>Kidnapping by KCIA</h2>
firstnameplaceholder was almost killed in August 1973, when he was kidnapped from a hotel in Tokyo by KCIA agents in response to his criticism of President Park's yushin program, which granted near-dictatorial powers. Years later, firstnameplaceholder reflected on these events during his 2000 Nobel Peace Prize lecture:Philip Habib, the US ambassador in Seoul, had interceded for him with the South Korean government; the "airplane" referred to was a patrol plane from the Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force which was tracking the kidnappers.[9]Although firstnameplaceholder returned to South Korea, he was banned from politics and imprisoned in 1976 for having participated in the proclamation of an anti-government manifesto and sentenced for five years in prison, which was reduced to house arrest in 1978.[6] During this period, he was designated a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty International.[10]firstnameplaceholder had his political rights restored in 1979 after Park was assassinated.
<h2>Death sentence and exile</h2>
In 1980, firstnameplaceholder was arrested and sentenced to death on charges of sedition and conspiracy in the wake of another coup by Chun Doo-hwan and a popular uprising in Gwangju, his political stronghold.[11]Pope John Paul II sent a letter to then-South Korean President Chun Doo-hwan on 11 December 1980, asking for clemency for firstnameplaceholder, a Catholic,[12] and with the intervention of the United States government,[13] the sentence was commuted to 20 years in prison.He was given exile in the U.S. and temporarily settled in Boston and taught at Harvard University as a visiting professor to the Center for International Affairs.[14] During his period abroad, he authored a number of opinion pieces in leading western newspapers that were sharply critical of the South Korean government. On 30 March 1983, firstnameplaceholder presented a speech on human rights and democracy at Emory University in Atlanta, Georgia and accepted an honorary Doctor of Laws degree by the institution. Two years later, in 1985, he returned to his homeland.
<h2>Road to presidency</h2>
firstnameplaceholder was again put under house arrest upon his return to Seoul but resumed his role as one of the principal leaders of the opposition. When Chun Doo-hwan succumbed to the popular demand in 1987 and allowed the country's first free presidential election, firstnameplaceholder Dae-Jung and the other leading opposition figure, firstnameplaceholder Young-sam, initially promised to unite behind one candidate. However, a dispute between the two men made firstnameplaceholder Dae-Jung split from the main opposition party, the Reunification Democratic Party, and form the Peace Democratic Party to run for the presidency.  As a result, the opposition vote was split into two, and the ex-General Roh Tae-woo, Chun Doo-hwan's handpicked successor, won with only 36.5% of the popular votes. firstnameplaceholder Young-sam received 28% and firstnameplaceholder Dae-Jung 27% of the votes.In 1992, firstnameplaceholder made yet another failed bid for the presidency, this time solely against firstnameplaceholder Young-sam, who had merged the RDP with the ruling Democratic Justice Party to form the Democratic Liberal Party, which eventually became the Grand National Party.[5] Many thought firstnameplaceholder Dae-Jung's political career to be effectively over when he took a hiatus from politics and departed for the United Kingdom to take a position at Clare Hall, Cambridge University, as a visiting scholar.[14] However, in 1995, he announced his return to politics and began his fourth quest for the presidency.His situation became favorable when the public revolted against the incumbent government in the wake of the nation's economic collapse during the Asian financial crisis just weeks before the presidential election. Allied with firstnameplaceholder Jong-pil, he defeated Lee Hoi-chang, firstnameplaceholder Young-sam's designated successor, in the election held on 18 December 1997. His swearing-in as the eighth president of South Korea on 25 February 1998 marked the first time in Korean history that the ruling party peacefully transferred power to a democratically-elected opposition winner.[5][15] The election was marred with controversy, as two candidates from the ruling party split the conservative vote (38.7% and 19.2% respectively), which enabled firstnameplaceholder to win with only 40.3% of the popular vote.[16] firstnameplaceholder's main opponent, Lee Hoi-chang, was a former Supreme Court Justice and had graduated at the top of his class from Seoul National University School of Law. Lee was widely viewed as elitist, and his candidacy was further damaged by charges that his sons had dodged the mandatory military service.firstnameplaceholder's education, in contrast, was limited to vocational high school, and many Koreans sympathized with the many trials and tribulations that he had endured. In 1997, the "North Winds" scandal involved lawmakers of Lee's party, who met North Korean agents in Beijing, who agreed to instigate, in exchange for bribes, a skirmish on the DMZ right before the presidential election to try to cause a panic that would hamper firstnameplaceholder Dae-Jung's campaign.[17][18][19] Lee's colleagues were later prosecuted.[20]Ex-presidents Park Chung-hee, Chun Doo-hwan, Roh Tae-woo, and firstnameplaceholder Young-sam originated from the Gyeongsang region, which became wealthier since 1945 partly because of the policies of Park, Chun, and Roh's regimes. firstnameplaceholder Dae-Jung was the first president to serve a full term who came from the southwestern Jeolla region, an area that had been neglected and less developed, at least partly because of the previous presidents' discriminatory policies. firstnameplaceholder's administration included more individuals from Jeolla, which led to charges of reverse discrimination. However, the actual numbers of ministers and administrators of firstnameplaceholder's government from Jeolla indicate that they were not overrepresented.
<h2>Presidency</h2>
During his presidency, he introduced South Korea's contemporary welfare state,[21][22][23] successfully shepherded the country's economic recovery, brought in a new era of economic transparency and fostered a greater role for South Korea in the world stage, including the FIFA World Cup, jointly hosted by South Korea and Japan in 2002. firstnameplaceholder completed his 5-year presidential term in 2003 and was succeeded by Roh Moo-hyun. A presidential library at Yonsei University was built to preserve firstnameplaceholder's legacy, and there is a convention center named after him in the city of Gwangju, the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Convention Center.[citation needed]firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder took office in the midst of the economic crisis that hit South Korea in the final year of firstnameplaceholder Young-sam's term. He vigorously pushed economic reform and restructuring recommended by the International Monetary Fund, in the process significantly altering the landscape of South Korean economy. He commenced the Gold-collecting campaign in South Korea to overcome  the debt to the International Monetary Fund.[24][5][25][26] After the economy shrank by 5.8 percent in 1998, it grew 10.2 percent in 1999.[3]  In effect, his policies were to make for a fairer market by holding the powerful chaebol (conglomerates) accountable, e.g., greater transparency in accounting practices. State subsidies to large corporations were dramatically cut or dropped.[citation needed] And firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder administration built up country-wide high-speed ICT infrastructure and fostered IT and Venture Businesses as the future source of growth.[27][28]His policy of engagement with North Korea has been termed the Sunshine Policy.[3] He moved to begin détente with respect to the totalitarian government in North Korea, which culminated in a historic summit meeting in 2000 in Pyongyang with North Korean leader firstnameplaceholder Jong-il. This marked a critical juncture in inter-Korean relations. On 13 October 2000, he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for these efforts.[29] A big consequence of these efforts is that on September 15, 2000, the Korean Unification Flag(Korean: 통일기; Hanja: 統一旗; RR: Tong-ilgi; MR: T'ong'ilgi) was carried into an Olympic Stadium during an Olympic opening ceremony for the first time. However, the historic event was tainted significantly by allegations that at least several hundred million dollars had been paid to North Korea. This is the Cash-for-summit scandal. Hyundai transferred $500 million to the North just months before the summit, triggering criticism that S.Korean Government paid for the summit. Hyundai claimed the money was a payment for exclusive business rights in electric power facilities, communication lines, an industrial park, cross-border roads and railway lines in North Korea. And in this regard, Park Jie-won was charged with violating domestic laws on foreign exchange trade and inter-Korean cooperation affairs while orchestrating covert money transfers by Hyundai to North Korea. Mr. Park played a pivotal role in arranging the first Inter-Korean summit. In May 2006, he was sentenced for three years in prison. Park was released in February 2007, and pardoned in December 2007.[30] Also in order to persuade North Korea to attend the summit, several "unconverted long-term prisoners" kept by South Korea were released and returned to North Korea.[31]After firstnameplaceholder achieved the presidency and moved into the Blue House, there was uncertainty and considerable speculation about how he would handle the office. He had been sentenced to death by Chun Doo Hwan. Chun and his successor Roe Tae Woo had been sentenced by firstnameplaceholder Dae Jung's predecessor President firstnameplaceholder Young Sam. firstnameplaceholder Dae Jung pardoned Chun.[citation needed]In 1999,  the Furgate scandal damaged firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder and his party's reputation.[32][33][34]
<h2>Post-presidency</h2>
firstnameplaceholder called for restraint against the North Koreans for detonating a nuclear weapon and defended the continued Sunshine Policy towards Pyongyang to defuse the crisis. He also received an honorary doctorate at the University of Portland on 17 April 2008 where he delivered his speech, "Challenge, Response, and God."[35]
<h2>Illness and death</h2>
firstnameplaceholder died on 18 August 2009 at 13:43 KST, at Severance Hospital of Yonsei University in Seoul.[36] He was first admitted to hospital suffering from pneumonia on 13 July. The cause of death was cardiac arrest caused by multiple organ dysfunction syndrome.[7] An interfaith state funeral was held for him on 23 August 2009 in front of the National Assembly Building, with a procession leading to the Seoul National Cemetery where he was interred according to Catholic traditions. He is the second person in South Korean history to be given a state funeral after Park Chung-hee.[37] North Korea sent a delegation to his funeral.[38]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder Atta secondnameplaceholder (/ˈkoʊfi ˈænæn/;[1] 8 April 1938 – 18 August 2018) was a Ghanaian diplomat who served as the seventh Secretary-General of the United Nations from January 1997 to December 2006.[2] secondnameplaceholder and the UN were the co-recipients of the 2001 Nobel Peace Prize.[3] He was the founder and chairman of the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Foundation, as well as chairman of The Elders, an international organization founded by Nelson Mandela.[4]secondnameplaceholder studied economics at Macalester College, international relations at the Graduate Institute Geneva, and management at MIT. secondnameplaceholder joined the UN in 1962, working for the World Health Organization's Geneva office. He went on to work in several capacities at the UN Headquarters including serving as the Under-Secretary-General for peacekeeping between March 1992 and December 1996. He was appointed the Secretary-General on 13 December 1996 by the Security Council, and later confirmed by the General Assembly, making him the first office holder to be elected from the UN staff itself. He was re-elected for a second term in 2001, and was succeeded as Secretary-General by Ban Ki-moon on 1 January 2007.As the Secretary-General, secondnameplaceholder reformed the UN bureaucracy; worked to combat HIV/AIDS, especially in Africa; and launched the UN Global Compact. He was criticized for not expanding the Security Council and faced calls for his resignation after an investigation into the Oil-for-Food Programme, but was largely exonerated of personal corruption.[5] After the end of his term as UN Secretary-General, he founded the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Foundation in 2007 to work on international development. In 2012, secondnameplaceholder was the UN–Arab League Joint Special Representative for Syria, to help find a resolution to the ongoing conflict there.[6][7] secondnameplaceholder quit after becoming frustrated with the UN's lack of progress with regards to conflict resolution.[8][9] In September 2016, secondnameplaceholder was appointed to lead a UN commission to investigate the Rohingya crisis.[10] He died in 2018 and was given a state funeral.
<h2>Early years and education</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was born in Kumasi in the Gold Coast (now Ghana) on 8 April 1938. His twin sister Efua Atta, who died in 1991, shared the middle name Atta, which in the Akan language means 'twin'.[11] secondnameplaceholder and his sister were born into one of the country's  Fante aristocratic families; both of their grandfathers and their uncle were Fante paramount chiefs.[12]In the Akan names tradition, some children are named according to the day of the week on which they were born, sometimes in relation to how many children precede them. firstnameplaceholder in Akan is the name that corresponds with Friday, the day of which secondnameplaceholder was born.[13] secondnameplaceholder said that his surname rhymes with "cannon" in English.[14] the last name secondnameplaceholder in Fante means fourth born child.From 1954 to 1957, secondnameplaceholder attended the elite Mfantsipim, an all-boys Methodist boarding school in Cape Coast founded in the 1870s. secondnameplaceholder said that the school taught him that "suffering anywhere, concerns people everywhere".[15] In 1957, the year secondnameplaceholder graduated from Mfantsipim, the Gold Coast gained independence from the UK and began using the name "Ghana".In 1958, secondnameplaceholder began studying economics at the Kumasi College of Science and Technology, now the Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology of Ghana. He received a Ford Foundation grant, enabling him to complete his undergraduate studies in economics at Macalester College in St. Paul, Minnesota, United States, in 1961. secondnameplaceholder then completed a diplôme d'études approfondies DEA degree in International Relations at The Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies in Geneva, Switzerland, from 1961 to 1962. After some years of work experience, he studied at the MIT Sloan School of Management[16] (1971–72) in the Sloan Fellows program and earned a master's degree in management.secondnameplaceholder was fluent in English, French, Akan, and some Kru languages as well as other African languages.[17]
<h2>Career</h2>
In 1962, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder started working as a budget officer for the World Health Organization, an agency of the United Nations (UN).[18] From 1974 to 1976, he worked as a manager of the state-owned Ghana Tourist Development Company in Accra.[19] In 1980 he became the head of personnel for the office of the UN High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) in Geneva. Between 1981 and 1983 he was a member of the Governing Board of the International School of Geneva.[20] In 1983 he became the director of administrative management services of the UN Secretariat in New York. In 1987, secondnameplaceholder was appointed as an Assistant Secretary-General for Human Resources Management and Security Coordinator for the UN system. In 1990, he became Assistant Secretary-General for Program Planning, Budget and Finance, and Control.[19]When Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali established the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) in 1992, secondnameplaceholder was appointed to the new department as Deputy to then Under-Secretary-General Marrack Goulding.[21] secondnameplaceholder was subsequently appointed in March 1993 as Under-Secretary-General of that department.[22] On 29 August 1995, while Boutros-Ghali was unreachable on an airplane, secondnameplaceholder instructed United Nations officials to "relinquish for a limited period of time their authority to veto air strikes in Bosnia." This move allowed NATO forces to conduct Operation Deliberate Force and made him a favorite of the United States. According to Richard Holbrooke, secondnameplaceholder's "gutsy performance" convinced the United States that he would be a good replacement for Boutros-Ghali.[23]He was appointed a Special Representative of the Secretary-General to the former Yugoslavia, serving from November 1995 to March 1996.[24][25]In 2003, retired Canadian General Roméo Dallaire, who was force commander of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda, claimed that secondnameplaceholder was overly passive in his response to the imminent genocide. In his book Shake Hands with the Devil: The Failure of Humanity in Rwanda (2003), Dallaire asserted that secondnameplaceholder held back UN troops from intervening to settle the conflict, and from providing more logistical and material support. Dallaire claimed that secondnameplaceholder failed to provide responses to his repeated faxes asking for access to a weapons depository; such weapons could have helped Dallaire defend the endangered Tutsis. In 2004, ten years after the genocide in which an estimated 800,000 people were killed, secondnameplaceholder said, "I could and should have done more to sound the alarm and rally support."[26]In his book Interventions: A Life in War and Peace, secondnameplaceholder again argued that the United Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations could have made better use of the media to raise awareness of the violence in Rwanda and put pressure on governments to provide the troops necessary for an intervention. secondnameplaceholder explained that the events in Somalia and the collapse of the UNOSOM II mission fostered a hesitation among UN Member states to approve robust peacekeeping operations. As a result, when the UNAMIR mission was approved just days after the battle, the resulting force lacked the troop levels, resources and mandate to operate effectively.[27]
<h2>Secretary-General of the United Nations (1997–2006)</h2>
In 1996, Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali ran unopposed for a second term. Although he won 14 of the 15 votes on the Security Council, he was vetoed by the United States.[28] After four deadlocked meetings of the Security Council, Boutros-Ghali suspended his candidacy, becoming the only Secretary-General ever to be denied a second term. secondnameplaceholder was the leading candidate to replace him, beating Amara Essy by one vote in the first round. However, France vetoed secondnameplaceholder four times before finally abstaining. The UN Security Council recommended secondnameplaceholder on 13 December 1996.[29][30] Confirmed four days later by the vote of the General Assembly,[31] he started his first term as Secretary-General on 1 January 1997.Due to Boutros-Ghali's overthrow, a second secondnameplaceholder term would give Africa the office of Secretary-General for three consecutive terms. In 2001, the Asia-Pacific Group agreed to support secondnameplaceholder for a second term in return for the African Group's support for an Asian Secretary-General in the 2006 selection.[32] The Security Council recommended secondnameplaceholder for a second term on 27 June 2001, and the General Assembly approved his reappointment on 29 June 2001.[33]Soon after taking office in 1997, secondnameplaceholder released two reports on management reform. On 17 March 1997, the report Management and Organisational Measures (A/51/829) introduced new management mechanisms through the establishment of a cabinet-style body to assist him and be grouping the UN's activities in accordance with four core missions. A comprehensive reform agenda was issued on 14 July 1997 entitled Renewing the United Nations: A Programme for Reform (A/51/950). Key proposals included the introduction of strategic management to strengthen unity of purpose, the establishment of the position of Deputy Secretary-General, a 10-percent reduction in posts, a reduction in administrative costs, the consolidation of the UN at the country level, and reaching out to civil society and the private sector as partners. secondnameplaceholder also proposed to hold a Millennium Summit in 2000.[34]
After years of research, secondnameplaceholder presented a progress report, In Larger Freedom, to the UN General Assembly, on 21 March 2005. secondnameplaceholder recommended Security Council expansion and a host of other UN reforms.[35]On 31 January 2006, secondnameplaceholder outlined his vision for a comprehensive and extensive reform of the UN in a policy speech to the United Nations Association UK. The speech, delivered at Central Hall, Westminster, also marked the 60th Anniversary of the first meetings of the General Assembly and Security Council.[36]On 7 March 2006, he presented to the General Assembly his proposals for a fundamental overhaul of the United Nations Secretariat. The reform report is entitled Investing in the United Nations, For a Stronger Organization Worldwide.[37]On 30 March 2006, he presented to the General Assembly his analysis and recommendations for updating the entire work programme of the United Nations Secretariat. The reform report is entitled: Mandating and Delivering: Analysis and Recommendations to Facilitate the Review of Mandates.[38]Regarding the UN Human Rights Council, secondnameplaceholder said "declining credibility" had "cast a shadow on the reputation of the United Nations system. Unless we re-make our human rights machinery, we may be unable to renew public confidence in the United Nations itself." However, he did believe that, despite its flaws, the council could do good.[39][40]In March 2000, secondnameplaceholder appointed the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations[41] to assess the shortcomings of the then existing system and to make specific and realistic recommendations for change.[42] The panel was composed of individuals experienced in conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peace-building. The report it produced, which became known as the Brahimi Report, after Chair of the Panel Lakhdar Brahimi, called for:[43]The Panel further noted that in order to be effective, UN peacekeeping operations must be properly resourced and equipped, and operate under clear, credible and achievable mandates.[43] In a letter transmitting the report to the General Assembly and Security Council, secondnameplaceholder stated that the Panel's recommendations were essential to make the United Nations truly credible as a force for peace.[44] Later that same year, the Security Council adopted several provisions relating to peacekeeping following the report, in Resolution 1327.[45]In 2000, secondnameplaceholder issued a report entitled: "We the peoples: the role of the United Nations in the 21st century".[46] The report called for member states to "put people at the centre of everything we do.[47] No calling is more noble, and no responsibility greater, than that of enabling men, women and children, in cities and villages around the world, to make their lives better".[48]:7In the final chapter of the report, secondnameplaceholder called to "free our fellow men and women from the abject and dehumanizing poverty in which more than 1 billion of them are currently confined".[48]:77At the Millennium Summit in September 2000, national leaders adopted the Millennium Declaration, which was subsequently implemented by the United Nations Secretariat as the Millennium Development Goals in 2001.[49]Within the "We the Peoples" document, secondnameplaceholder suggested the establishment of a United Nations Information Technology Service (UNITeS), a consortium of high-tech volunteer corps, including NetCorps Canada and Net Corps America, which United Nations Volunteers would co-ordinate. In the Report of the high-level panel of experts on information and communication technology (22 May 2000) suggesting a UN ICT Task Force, the panel welcomed the establishment of UNITeS, and made suggestions on its configuration and implementation strategy, including that ICT4D volunteering opportunities make mobilizing "national human resources" (local ICT experts) within developing countries a priority, for both men and women. The initiative was launched at the United Nations Volunteers and was active from February 2001 to February 2005. Initiative staff and volunteers participated in the World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS) in Geneva in December 2003.[50]In an address to The World Economic Forum on 31 January 1999, Secretary-General secondnameplaceholder argued that the "goals of the United Nations and those of business can, indeed, be mutually supportive" and proposed that the private sector and the United Nations initiate "a global compact of shared values and principles, which will give a human face to the global market".[51]On 26 July 2000, the United Nations Global Compact was officially launched at UN headquarters in New York. It is a principle-based framework for businesses which aims to "Catalyse actions in support of broader UN goals, such as the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)".[52] The Compact established ten core principles in the areas of human rights, labour, the environment and anti-corruption, and under the Compact, companies commit to the ten principles and are brought together with UN agencies, labour groups and civil society to effectively implement them.Towards the end of the 1990s, increased awareness of the destructive potential of epidemics such as HIV/AIDS pushed public health issues to the top of the global development agenda. In April 2001, secondnameplaceholder issued a five-point "Call to Action" to address the HIV/AIDS pandemic. Stating it was a "personal priority", secondnameplaceholder proposed the establishment of a Global AIDS and Health Fund, "dedicated to the battle against HIV/AIDS and other infectious diseases"[53] to stimulate the increased international spending needed to help developing countries confront the HIV/AIDS crisis. In June of that year, the General Assembly of the United Nations committed to the creation of such a fund during a special session on AIDS,[54] and the permanent secretariat of the Global Fund was subsequently established in January 2002.[55]Following the failure of secondnameplaceholder and the International Community to intervene in the genocide in Rwanda and in Srebrenica, secondnameplaceholder asked whether the international community had an obligation in such situations to intervene to protect civilian populations. In a speech to the General Assembly on 20 September 1999 "to address the prospects for human security and intervention in the next century,"[56] secondnameplaceholder argued that individual sovereignty—the protections afforded by the Declaration of Human Rights and the Charter of the UN—was being strengthened, while the notion of state sovereignty was being redefined by globalization and international co-operation. As a result, the UN and its member states had to consider a willingness to act to prevent conflict and civilian suffering,[57] a dilemma between "two concepts of sovereignty" that secondnameplaceholder also presented in a preceding article in The Economist, on 16 September 1999.[58]In September 2001 the Canadian government established an ad hoc committee to address this balance between state sovereignty and humanitarian intervention. The International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty published its final report in 2001, which focused on not on the right of states to intervene but a responsibility to protect populations at risk. The report moved beyond the question of military intervention, arguing that a range of diplomatic and humanitarian actions could also be utilized to protect civilian populations.[59]In 2005, secondnameplaceholder included the doctrine of "Responsibility to Protect" in his report Larger Freedom.[59] When that report was endorsed by the UN General Assembly, it amounted to the first formal endorsement by UN Member States of the doctrine of Responsibility to Protect.[60]In the years after 1998 when UNSCOM was expelled by the government of Saddam Hussein and during the Iraq disarmament crisis, in which the United States blamed UNSCOM and former IAEA director Hans Blix for failing to properly disarm Iraq, former UNSCOM chief weapons inspector Scott Ritter blamed secondnameplaceholder for being slow and ineffective in enforcing Security Council resolutions on Iraq and was overtly submissive to the demands of the Clinton administration for regime removal and inspection of sites, often Presidential palaces, that were not mandated in any resolution and were of questionable intelligence value, severely hampering UNSCOM's ability to co-operate with the Iraqi government and contributed to their expulsion from the country.[61][62] Ritter also claimed that secondnameplaceholder regularly interfered with the work of the inspectors and diluted the chain of command by trying to micromanage all of the activities of UNSCOM, which caused intelligence processing (and the resulting inspections) to be backed up and caused confusion with the Iraqis as to who was in charge and as a result, they generally refused to take orders from Ritter or Rolf Ekéus without explicit approval from secondnameplaceholder, which could have taken days, if not weeks. He later believed that secondnameplaceholder was oblivious to the fact the Iraqis took advantage of this in order to delay inspections. He claimed that on one occasion, secondnameplaceholder refused to implement a no-notice inspection of the SSO headquarters and instead tried to negotiate access, but the negotiation ended up taking nearly six weeks, giving the Iraqis more than enough time to clean out the site.[63]During the build-up to the 2003 invasion of Iraq, secondnameplaceholder called on the United States and the United Kingdom not to invade without the support of the United Nations. In a September 2004 interview on the BBC, when questioned about the legal authority for the invasion, secondnameplaceholder said he believed it was not in conformity with the UN charter and was illegal.[64][65]In 1998, secondnameplaceholder was deeply involved in supporting the transition from military to civilian rule in Nigeria. The following year, he supported the efforts of East Timor to secure independence from Indonesia. In 2000, he was responsible for certifying Israel 's withdrawal from Lebanon, and in 2006, he led talks in New York between the presidents of Cameroon and Nigeria which led to a settlement of the dispute between the two countries over the Bakassi peninsula.[66]secondnameplaceholder and Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad disagreed sharply on Iran's nuclear program, on an Iranian exhibition of cartoons mocking the Holocaust, and on the then upcoming International Conference to Review the Global Vision of the Holocaust, an Iranian Holocaust denial conference in 2006.[67] During a visit to Iran instigated by continued Iranian uranium enrichment, secondnameplaceholder said "I think the tragedy of the Holocaust is an undeniable historical fact and we should really accept that fact and teach people what happened in World War II and ensure it is never repeated."[67]secondnameplaceholder supported sending a UN peacekeeping mission to Darfur, Sudan.[68] He worked with the government of Sudan to accept a transfer of power from the African Union peacekeeping mission to a UN one.[69] secondnameplaceholder also worked with several Arab and Muslim countries on women's rights and other topics.[70]Beginning in 1998, secondnameplaceholder convened an annual UN "Security Council Retreat" with the 15 States' representatives of the council. It was held at the Rockefeller Brothers Fund (RBF) Conference Center at the Rockefeller family estate in Pocantico Hills, New York, and was sponsored by both the RBF and the UN.[71]In June 2004, secondnameplaceholder was given a copy of the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) report on the complaint brought by four female workers against Ruud Lubbers, UN High Commissioner for Refugees, for sexual harassment, abuse of authority, and retaliation. The report also reviewed a long-serving staff member's allegations of sexual harassment and misconduct against Werner Blatter, Director of UNHCR Personnel. The investigation found Lubbers guilty of sexual harassment; no mention was made publicly of the other charge against a senior official, or two subsequent complaints filed later that year. In the course of the official investigation, Lubbers wrote a letter which some considered was a threat to the female worker who had brought the charges.[72] On 15 July 2004, secondnameplaceholder cleared Lubbers of the accusations, saying they were not substantial enough legally.[73] The internal UN-OIOS report on Lubbers was leaked, and sections accompanied by an article by Kate Holt were published in a British newspaper. In February 2005, Lubbers resigned as head of the UN refugee agency, saying that he wanted to relieve political pressure on secondnameplaceholder.[74]In December 2004, reports surfaced that the Secretary-General's son Kojo secondnameplaceholder received payments from the Swiss company Cotecna Inspection SA, which had won a lucrative contract under the UN Oil-for-Food Programme. firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder called for an investigation to look into the allegations.[75] On 11 November 2005, The Sunday Times agreed to apologise and pay a substantial sum in damages to Kojo secondnameplaceholder, accepting that the allegations were untrue.[76]secondnameplaceholder appointed the Independent Inquiry Committee,[77] which was led by former US Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker,[78] then the director of the United Nations Association of the US. In his first interview with the Inquiry Committee, secondnameplaceholder denied having had a meeting with Cotecna. Later in the inquiry, he recalled that he had met with Cotecna's chief executive Elie-Georges Massey twice. In a final report issued on 27 October, the committee found insufficient evidence to indict firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder on any illegal actions, but did find fault with Benon Sevan, an Armenian-Cypriot national who had worked for the UN for about 40 years. Appointed by secondnameplaceholder to the Oil-For-Food role, Sevan repeatedly asked Iraqis for allocations of oil to the African Middle East Petroleum Company. Sevan's behavior was "ethically improper", Volcker said to reporters. Sevan repeatedly denied the charges and argued that he was being made a "scapegoat".[79] The Volcker report was highly critical of the UN management structure and the Security Council oversight. It strongly recommended a new position be established of Chief Operating Officer (COO), to handle the fiscal and administrative responsibilities then under the Secretary-General's office. The report listed the companies, both Western and Middle Eastern, which had benefited illegally from the program.[78]In 2001, its centennial year, the Nobel Committee decided that the Peace Prize was to be divided between the UN and secondnameplaceholder. They were awarded the Peace Prize "for their work for a better organized and more peaceful world,"[3] having revitalized the UN and for having given priority to human rights. The Nobel Committee also recognized his commitment to the struggle to containing the spread of HIV in Africa and his declared opposition to international terrorism.[80]secondnameplaceholder defended his deputy Secretary-General Mark Malloch Brown,[81] who openly criticized the United States in a speech on 6 June 2006: "[T]he prevailing practice of seeking to use the UN almost by stealth as a diplomatic tool while failing to stand up for it against its domestic critics is simply not sustainable. You will lose the UN one way or another. [...] [That] the US is constructively engaged with the UN [...] is not well known or understood, in part because much of the public discourse that reaches the US heartland has been largely abandoned to its loudest detractors such as Rush Limbaugh and Fox News."[82] Malloch later said his talk was a "sincere and constructive critique of U.S. policy toward the U.N. by a friend and admirer."[83]The talk was unusual because it violated unofficial policy of not having top officials publicly criticize member nations.[83] The interim U.S. ambassador John R. Bolton, appointed by President George W. Bush, was reported to have told secondnameplaceholder on the phone: "I've known you since 1989 and I'm telling you this is the worst mistake by a senior UN official that I have seen in that entire time."[83] Observers from other nations supported Malloch's view that conservative politicians in the U.S. prevented many citizens from understanding the benefits of U.S. involvement in the UN.[84]On 19 September 2006, secondnameplaceholder gave a farewell address to world leaders gathered at the UN headquarters in New York, in anticipation of his retirement on 31 December. In the speech he outlined three major problems of "an unjust world economy, world disorder, and widespread contempt for human rights and the rule of law", which he believed "have not resolved, but sharpened" during his time as Secretary-General. He also pointed to violence in Africa, and the Arab–Israeli conflict as two major issues warranting attention.[85]On 11 December 2006, in his final speech as Secretary-General, delivered at the Harry S. Truman Presidential Library in Independence, Missouri, secondnameplaceholder recalled Truman's leadership in the founding of the United Nations. He called for the United States to return to President Truman's multilateralist foreign policies, and to follow Truman's credo that "the responsibility of the great states is to serve and not dominate the peoples of the world". He also said that the United States must maintain its commitment to human rights, "including in the struggle against terrorism."[86][87]The United Nations Archives and Records Management Section (UNARMS) provides full text access to firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's declassified archives while he served as Secretary-General of the United Nations (1997–2006)
Search firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's Archives
<h2>Post-UN career</h2>
After his service as UN Secretary-General, secondnameplaceholder took up residence in Geneva and worked in a leading capacity on various international humanitarian endeavors.[88]In 2007, secondnameplaceholder established the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Foundation, an independent, not-for-profit organization that works to promote better global governance and strengthen the capacities of people and countries to achieve a fairer, more peaceful world.[89]The organisation was founded on the principles that fair and peaceful societies rest on three pillars: Peace and Security, Sustainable Development, and Human Rights and the Rule of Law, and they have made it their mission to mobilise the leadership and the political resolve needed to tackle threats to these three pillars ranging from violent conflict to flawed elections and climate change, with the aim of achieving a fairer, more peaceful world.[90]The Foundation provides the analytical, communication and co-ordination capacities needed to ensure that these objectives are achieved. secondnameplaceholder's contribution to peace worldwide is delivered through mediation, political mentoring, advocacy and advice. Through his engagement, secondnameplaceholder aimed to strengthen local and international conflict resolution capabilities. The Foundation provides the analytical and logistical support to facilitate this in co-operation with relevant local, regional and international actors.[91] The Foundation works mainly through private diplomacy, where secondnameplaceholder provided informal counsel and participated in discreet diplomatic initiatives to avert or resolve crises by applying his experience and inspirational leadership. He was often asked to intercede in crises, sometimes as an impartial independent mediator, sometimes as a special envoy of the international community. In recent years he had provided such counsel to Burkina Faso, Kenya, Myanmar, Senegal, Iraq and Colombia.[92]Following the outbreak of violence during the 2007 Presidential elections in Kenya, the African Union established a Panel of Eminent African Personalities to assist in finding a peaceful solution to the crisis.[93]The panel, headed by secondnameplaceholder, managed to convince the two principal parties to the conflict, President Mwai Kibaki's Party of National Unity (PNU) and Raila Odinga's Orange Democratic Movement (ODM), to participate in the Kenya National Dialogue and Reconciliation Process (KNDR).[93] Over the course of 41 days of negotiations, several agreements regarding taking actions to stop the violence and remedying its consequences were signed. On 28 February, President Mwai Kibaki and Raila Odinga signed a coalition government agreement.[94][95]On 23 February 2012, secondnameplaceholder was appointed as the UN-Arab League envoy to Syria, in an attempt to end the civil war taking place.[7] He developed a six-point plan for peace:[96]On 2 August, he resigned as UN and Arab League joint special envoy to Syria,[97] citing the intransigence of both the Assad government and the rebels, as well as the stalemate on the Security Council as preventing any peaceful resolution of the situation.[98] secondnameplaceholder also stated that the lack of international unity and ineffective diplomacy among the world leaders had made the peaceful resolution in Syria an impossible task.[99]secondnameplaceholder served as the Chair of the Global Commission on Elections, Democracy and Security. The commission was launched in May 2011 as a joint initiative of the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Foundation and the International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance. It comprised 12 eminent individuals from around the world, including Ernesto Zedillo, Martti Ahtisaari, Madeleine Albright and Amartya Sen, and aimed to highlight the importance of the integrity of elections to achieving a more secure, prosperous and stable world. The Commission released its final report: Democracy, a Strategy to Improve the Integrity of Elections Worldwide, in September 2012.In September 2016, secondnameplaceholder was asked to lead the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State (in Myanmar)[100][101][102][103] – an impoverished region beset by ethnic conflict and extreme sectarian violence, particularly by Myanmar's Buddhist majority against the Rohingya Muslim minority, further targeted by government forces.[104][105][106][107] The commission, widely known simply as the "secondnameplaceholder Commission", was opposed by many Myanmar Buddhists as unwelcome interference in their relations with the Rohingya.[100]When the secondnameplaceholder commission released its final report,[102] the week of 24 August 2017, with recommendations unpopular with all sides, violence exploded in the Rohingya conflict – the largest and bloodiest humanitarian disaster in the region in decades – driving most of the Rohingya from Myanmar.[107][106][108] secondnameplaceholder attempted to engage the United Nations to resolve the matter,[109] but failed.secondnameplaceholder died a week before the first anniversary of the report, shortly after an announcement by a replacement commission that it would not "point fingers" at the guilty parties – leading to widespread concern that the new commission was just a sham to protect culpable Myanmar government officials and citizens from accountability.[103][110][108][111]In 2018, before secondnameplaceholder's death, Myanmar's civilian government, under the direction of State Councilor Aung San Suu Kyi, made a gesture of acceptance of the secondnameplaceholder commission's recommendations by convening another board – the Advisory Board for the Committee for Implementation of the Recommendations on Rakhine State – ostensibly to implement the secondnameplaceholder commission's proposed reforms, but never actually implemented them. Some of the international representatives resigned – notably the panel's Secretary, Thailand's former foreign minister Surakiart Sathirathai, and former U.S. ambassador to the U.N. Bill Richardson – decrying the "implementation" committee as ineffective, or a "whitewash."[101][112]Corporate boardsIn March 2011,[113] secondnameplaceholder became a member of the Advisory Board for Investcorp Bank B. S. C.[114] Europe,[115] an international private equity firm and sovereign wealth fund owned by the United Arab Emirates. He held the position until 2018.secondnameplaceholder became member of the Global Advisory Board of Macro Advisory Partners LLP, Risk and strategic consulting firm based in London and New York, for business, finance and government decision-makers, with some operations related to Investcorp.[116]Non-profit organizationsIn addition to the above, secondnameplaceholder also became involved with several organizations with both global and African focuses, including the following:secondnameplaceholder served as Chair of The Elders, a group of independent global leaders who work together on peace and human rights issues.[130][131] In November 2008, secondnameplaceholder and fellow Elders Jimmy Carter and Graça Machel attempted to travel to Zimbabwe to make a first-hand assessment of the humanitarian situation in the country. Refused entry, the Elders instead carried out their assessment from Johannesburg, where they met Zimbabwe- and South Africa-based leaders from politics, business, international organisations, and civil society.[132] In May 2011, following months of political violence in Côte d'Ivoire, secondnameplaceholder travelled to the country with Elders Desmond Tutu and Mary Robinson to encourage national reconciliation.[133] On 16 October 2014, secondnameplaceholder attended the One Young World Summit in Dublin. During a session with fellow Elder Mary Robinson, secondnameplaceholder encouraged 1,300 young leaders from 191 countries to lead on intergenerational issues such as climate change and the need for action to take place now, not tomorrow.[134][135]"We don't have to wait to act. The action must be now. You will come across people who think we should start tomorrow. Even for those who believe action should begin tomorrow, remind them tomorrow begins now, tomorrow begins today, so let's all move forward."[136]secondnameplaceholder chaired the Africa Progress Panel (APP), a group of ten distinguished individuals who advocate at the highest levels for equitable and sustainable development in Africa. As Chair, he facilitates coalition building to leverage and broker knowledge, in addition to convening decision-makers to influence policy and create lasting change in Africa. Every year, the Panel releases a report, the Africa Progress Report, which outlines an issue of immediate importance to the continent and suggests a set of associated policies. In 2014, the Africa Progress Report highlighted the potential of African fisheries, agriculture, and forests to drive economic development.[137] The 2015 report explores the role of climate change and the potential of renewable energy investments in determining Africa's economic future.[138]On 4 September 2012, secondnameplaceholder with Nader Mousavizadeh wrote a memoir, Interventions: A Life in War and Peace.[139] Published by Penguin Press, the book has been described as a "personal biography of global statecraft".[140]
<h2>Personal life</h2>
In 1965, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder married Titi Alakija, a Nigerian woman from an aristocratic family. Several years later they had a daughter, Ama, and later a son, Kojo. The couple separated in the late 1970s,[141] and divorced in 1983.[11] In 1984, secondnameplaceholder married Nane secondnameplaceholder [sv; et; ru], a Swedish lawyer at the UN and a maternal half-niece of diplomat Raoul Wallenberg.[142] She has a daughter, Nina, from a previous marriage.[143] His brother, Kobina secondnameplaceholder served as Ghana's ambassador to Morocco.[144]
<h2>Death and state funeral</h2>
secondnameplaceholder died on the morning of 18 August 2018 in Bern, Switzerland at the age of 80, after what his family described as "a short illness".[145][146] António Guterres, the current UN Secretary-General, said that "firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was a champion for peace and a guiding force for good."[147][145] The body of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was returned to his native Ghana from Geneva in a brief and solemn ceremony at the Kotoka International Airport in Accra, on 10 September 2018.[148] His coffin, draped in the blue UN flag, was accompanied by his widow Nane secondnameplaceholder, his children and senior diplomats from the international organisation.[148][149]On 13 September 2018, a state funeral was held for secondnameplaceholder in Ghana at the Accra International Conference Centre.[150] The ceremony was attended by several political leaders from across Africa as well as Ghanaian traditional rulers, European royalty and dignitaries from the international community, including the U.N. Secretary-General António Guterres.[151] Prior to the funeral service, his body lay in state in the foyer of the same venue, from 11–12 September 2018.[152] A private burial followed the funeral service at the new Military Cemetery at Burma Camp, with full military honours and the sounding of the Last Post by army buglers and a 17-gun salute.[153][154][155][156]
<h2>Memorials and legacy</h2>
The United Nations Postal Administration released a new stamp in memory of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder on 31 May 2019. secondnameplaceholder's portrait on the stamp was designed by artist Martin Mörck. The firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder International Peacekeeping Training Centre and the Ghana-India firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Centre of Excellence in ICT, both in Accra, are named in his honour. The firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder University of Guinea is also named after him.Biography of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, by Chloé Maurel, in: BIOGRAPHICAL DICTIONARY OF SECRETARIES-GENERAL OF INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS. [archive]Friederike Bauer, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder. Ein Leben (in German), Fischer, 2005.Stanley Meisler, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder. A Man of Peace in a World of War (in English), Wiley, 2007.
(!!)Article(!/!)
James Earl secondnameplaceholder Jr. (born October 1, 1924) is an American philanthropist, former politician and businessman who served as the 39th president of the United States from 1977 to 1981. A member of the Democratic Party, he previously served as a Georgia State Senator from 1963 to 1967 and as the 76th governor of Georgia from 1971 to 1975. Since leaving the presidency, secondnameplaceholder has remained engaged in political and social projects as a private citizen. In 2002, he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for his work in co-founding The secondnameplaceholder Center.Raised in Plains, Georgia, secondnameplaceholder graduated from the United States Naval Academy in 1946 with a Bachelor of Science degree and joined the United States Navy, where he served on submarines. After the death of his father in 1953, secondnameplaceholder left his naval career and returned home to Georgia to take up the reins of his family's peanut-growing business. secondnameplaceholder inherited comparatively little because of his father's forgiveness of debts and the division of the estate among the children. Nevertheless, his ambition to expand and grow the secondnameplaceholder family's peanut business was fulfilled. During this period, secondnameplaceholder was motivated to oppose the political climate of racial segregation and support the growing civil rights movement. He became an activist within the Democratic Party. From 1963 to 1967, secondnameplaceholder served in the Georgia State Senate, and in 1970, he was elected as Governor of Georgia, defeating former Governor Carl Sanders in the Democratic primary on an anti-segregation platform advocating affirmative action for ethnic minorities. secondnameplaceholder remained as governor until 1975. Despite being a dark-horse candidate who was little known outside of Georgia at the start of the campaign, secondnameplaceholder won the 1976 Democratic presidential nomination. In the general election, secondnameplaceholder ran as an outsider and narrowly defeated incumbent Republican President Gerald Ford.On his second day in office, secondnameplaceholder pardoned all the Vietnam War draft evaders by issuing Proclamation 4483.[1] During secondnameplaceholder's term as president, two new cabinet-level departments, the Department of Energy and the Department of Education, were established. He established a national energy policy that included conservation, price control, and new technology. In foreign affairs, secondnameplaceholder pursued the Camp David Accords, the Panama Canal Treaties, the second round of Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT II), and the return of the Panama Canal Zone to Panama. On the economic front, he confronted stagflation, a persistent combination of high inflation, high unemployment and slow growth. The end of his presidential tenure was marked by the 1979–1981 Iran hostage crisis, the 1979 energy crisis, the Three Mile Island nuclear accident, and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. In response to the invasion, secondnameplaceholder escalated the Cold War when he ended détente, imposed a grain embargo against the Soviets, enunciated the secondnameplaceholder Doctrine, and led a 1980 Summer Olympics boycott in Moscow. In 1980, secondnameplaceholder faced a challenge from Senator Ted Kennedy in the primaries, but he won re-nomination at the 1980 Democratic National Convention. secondnameplaceholder lost the general election to Republican nominee Ronald Reagan in an electoral landslide. He is the only president in American history to serve a full term of office and never appoint a justice to the Supreme Court. Polls of historians and political scientists usually rank secondnameplaceholder as a below-average president. secondnameplaceholder's activities since leaving the presidency have been viewed more favorably than his presidency itself.In 1982, secondnameplaceholder established The secondnameplaceholder Center to promote and expand human rights. He has traveled extensively to conduct peace negotiations, monitor elections, and advance disease prevention and eradication in developing nations. secondnameplaceholder is considered a key figure in the charity Habitat for Humanity. He has written over 30 books, ranging from political memoirs to poetry, while continuing to actively comment on ongoing American and global affairs such as the Israeli–Palestinian conflict. At 96 years old and with a 40-year-long retirement, he is both the oldest living president and the one with the longest post-presidency. He is also the sixth-oldest living former world leader.James Earl secondnameplaceholder Jr. (born October 1, 1924) is an American philanthropist, former politician and businessman who served as the 39th president of the United States from 1977 to 1981. A member of the Democratic Party, he previously served as a Georgia State Senator from 1963 to 1967 and as the 76th governor of Georgia from 1971 to 1975. Since leaving the presidency, secondnameplaceholder has remained engaged in political and social projects as a private citizen. In 2002, he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for his work in co-founding The secondnameplaceholder Center.Raised in Plains, Georgia, secondnameplaceholder graduated from the United States Naval Academy in 1946 with a Bachelor of Science degree and joined the United States Navy, where he served on submarines. After the death of his father in 1953, secondnameplaceholder left his naval career and returned home to Georgia to take up the reins of his family's peanut-growing business. secondnameplaceholder inherited comparatively little because of his father's forgiveness of debts and the division of the estate among the children. Nevertheless, his ambition to expand and grow the secondnameplaceholder family's peanut business was fulfilled. During this period, secondnameplaceholder was motivated to oppose the political climate of racial segregation and support the growing civil rights movement. He became an activist within the Democratic Party. From 1963 to 1967, secondnameplaceholder served in the Georgia State Senate, and in 1970, he was elected as Governor of Georgia, defeating former Governor Carl Sanders in the Democratic primary on an anti-segregation platform advocating affirmative action for ethnic minorities. secondnameplaceholder remained as governor until 1975. Despite being a dark-horse candidate who was little known outside of Georgia at the start of the campaign, secondnameplaceholder won the 1976 Democratic presidential nomination. In the general election, secondnameplaceholder ran as an outsider and narrowly defeated incumbent Republican President Gerald Ford.On his second day in office, secondnameplaceholder pardoned all the Vietnam War draft evaders by issuing Proclamation 4483.[1] During secondnameplaceholder's term as president, two new cabinet-level departments, the Department of Energy and the Department of Education, were established. He established a national energy policy that included conservation, price control, and new technology. In foreign affairs, secondnameplaceholder pursued the Camp David Accords, the Panama Canal Treaties, the second round of Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT II), and the return of the Panama Canal Zone to Panama. On the economic front, he confronted stagflation, a persistent combination of high inflation, high unemployment and slow growth. The end of his presidential tenure was marked by the 1979–1981 Iran hostage crisis, the 1979 energy crisis, the Three Mile Island nuclear accident, and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. In response to the invasion, secondnameplaceholder escalated the Cold War when he ended détente, imposed a grain embargo against the Soviets, enunciated the secondnameplaceholder Doctrine, and led a 1980 Summer Olympics boycott in Moscow. In 1980, secondnameplaceholder faced a challenge from Senator Ted Kennedy in the primaries, but he won re-nomination at the 1980 Democratic National Convention. secondnameplaceholder lost the general election to Republican nominee Ronald Reagan in an electoral landslide. He is the only president in American history to serve a full term of office and never appoint a justice to the Supreme Court. Polls of historians and political scientists usually rank secondnameplaceholder as a below-average president. secondnameplaceholder's activities since leaving the presidency have been viewed more favorably than his presidency itself.In 1982, secondnameplaceholder established The secondnameplaceholder Center to promote and expand human rights. He has traveled extensively to conduct peace negotiations, monitor elections, and advance disease prevention and eradication in developing nations. secondnameplaceholder is considered a key figure in the charity Habitat for Humanity. He has written over 30 books, ranging from political memoirs to poetry, while continuing to actively comment on ongoing American and global affairs such as the Israeli–Palestinian conflict. At 96 years old and with a 40-year-long retirement, he is both the oldest living president and the one with the longest post-presidency. He is also the sixth-oldest living former world leader.
<h2>Early life</h2>
James Earl secondnameplaceholder Jr. was born on October 1, 1924, at the Wise Sanitarium (now the Lillian G. secondnameplaceholder Nursing Center) in Plains, Georgia, a hospital where his mother was employed as a registered nurse. secondnameplaceholder was the first U.S. president to be born in a hospital.[2] He was the eldest son of Bessie Lillian (née Gordy) and James Earl secondnameplaceholder Sr. secondnameplaceholder is a descendant of English immigrant Thomas secondnameplaceholder, who settled in Virginia in 1635. Numerous generations of secondnameplaceholders lived as cotton farmers in Georgia. secondnameplaceholder is also a descendant of Thomas Cornell, an ancestor of Cornell University's founder, and is distantly related to Richard Nixon and Bill Gates.[3]Plains was a boomtown of 600 people at the time of secondnameplaceholder's birth. secondnameplaceholder's father was a successful local businessman, who ran a general store, and was an investor in farmland.[4] secondnameplaceholder's father had previously served as a reserve second lieutenant in the U.S. Army Quartermaster Corps during World War I.[4]The family moved several times during secondnameplaceholder Jr.'s infancy.[2] The secondnameplaceholders settled on a dirt road in nearby Archery, which was almost entirely populated by impoverished African American families. They eventually had three more children: Gloria, Ruth, and Billy. secondnameplaceholder got along well with his parents, although his mother worked long hours and was often absent in his childhood. Although Earl was staunchly pro-segregation, he allowed his son to befriend the black farmhands' children. secondnameplaceholder was an enterprising teenager who was given his own acre of Earl's farmland where he grew, packaged, and sold peanuts. He also rented out a section of tenant housing that he had purchased.[2]secondnameplaceholder attended Plains High School from 1937 to 1941. By that time, Archery and Plains had been impoverished by the Great Depression, but the family benefited from New Deal farming subsidies, and Earl took a position as a community leader. Young firstnameplaceholder was a diligent student with a fondness for reading. A popular anecdote holds that he was passed over for valedictorian after he and his friends skipped school to venture downtown in a hot rod. secondnameplaceholder's truancy was mentioned in a local newspaper, although it is not clear he would have otherwise been valedictorian.[5] secondnameplaceholder's teacher, Julia Coleman, was an especially strong influence. As an adolescent, secondnameplaceholder played on the Plains High School basketball team; he also joined the Future Farmers of America and developed a lifelong interest in woodworking.[5]
<h2>Naval career</h2>
secondnameplaceholder had long dreamed of attending the U.S. Naval Academy. In 1941, he started undergraduate coursework in engineering at Georgia Southwestern College in nearby Americus, Georgia. The following year, he transferred to the Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta, and he earned admission to the Naval Academy in 1943. He was a good student but was seen as reserved and quiet, in contrast to the academy's culture of aggressive hazing of freshmen. While at the academy, secondnameplaceholder fell in love with Rosalynn Smith, a friend of his sister Ruth. The two married shortly after his graduation in 1946.[6] He was a sprint football player for the Navy Midshipmen.[7] secondnameplaceholder graduated 60th out of 820 midshipmen in the class of 1946 with a Bachelor of Science degree and was commissioned as an ensign.[8]  From 1946 to 1953, secondnameplaceholder and Rosalynn lived in Virginia, Hawaii, Connecticut, New York and California, during his deployments in the Atlantic and Pacific fleets.[9] In 1948, he began officer training for submarine duty and served aboard USS Pomfret. He was promoted to lieutenant junior grade in 1949. In 1951 he became attached to the diesel/electric USS K-1, (a.k.a. USS Barracuda), qualified for command, and served in several duties including Executive Officer.[10]In 1952, secondnameplaceholder began an association with the Navy's fledgling nuclear submarine program, then led by Captain Hyman G. Rickover. Rickover's demands on his men and machines were legendary, and secondnameplaceholder later said that, next to his parents, Rickover was the greatest influence on his life.[11] He was sent to the Naval Reactors Branch of the Atomic Energy Commission in Washington, D.C. for three month temporary duty, while Rosalynn moved with their children to Schenectady, New York. On December 12, 1952, an accident with the experimental NRX reactor at Atomic Energy of Canada's Chalk River Laboratories caused a partial meltdown resulting in millions of liters of radioactive water flooding the reactor building's basement. This left the reactor's core ruined.[12] secondnameplaceholder was ordered to Chalk River to lead a U.S. maintenance crew that joined other American and Canadian service personnel to assist in the shutdown of the reactor.[13] The painstaking process required each team member to don protective gear and be lowered individually into the reactor for a few minutes at a time, limiting their exposure to radioactivity while they disassembled the crippled reactor. During and after his presidency, secondnameplaceholder said that his experience at Chalk River had shaped his views on atomic energy and led him to cease development of a neutron bomb.[14]In March 1953, secondnameplaceholder began nuclear power school, a six-month non-credit course covering nuclear power plant operation at Union College in Schenectady.[9] His intent was to eventually work aboard USS Seawolf, which was planned to be the second U.S. nuclear submarine.  However, he never had the opportunity to serve aboard a nuclear submarine. secondnameplaceholder's father died two months before construction of Seawolf began, and secondnameplaceholder sought and obtained a release from active duty to enable him to take over the family peanut business. Based on that limited training, in later years secondnameplaceholder would nonetheless refer to himself as a "nuclear physicist".[15][16] Deciding to leave Schenectady proved difficult. Settling after moving so much, Rosalynn had grown comfortable with their life. Returning to small-town life in Plains seemed "a monumental step backward," she said later. On the other hand, secondnameplaceholder felt restricted by the rigidity of the military and yearned to assume a path more like his father's. secondnameplaceholder left active duty on October 9, 1953.[17][18] He served in the inactive Navy Reserve until 1961, and left the service with the rank of lieutenant.[19] His awards included the American Campaign Medal, World War II Victory Medal, China Service Medal, and National Defense Service Medal.[20]  As a submarine officer he also earned the "dolphin" badge.[21]
<h2>Farming</h2>
Earl secondnameplaceholder died a relatively wealthy man, having recently been elected to the Georgia House of Representatives. However, between his forgiveness of debts and the division of his wealth among heirs, his son firstnameplaceholder inherited comparatively little. For a year, firstnameplaceholder, Rosalynn, and their three sons lived in public housing in Plains; secondnameplaceholder is the only U.S. president to have lived in subsidized housing before he took office. secondnameplaceholder was knowledgeable in scientific and technological subjects, and he set out to expand the family's peanut-growing business. The transition from Navy to agribusinessman was difficult because his first-year harvest failed due to a drought; secondnameplaceholder was compelled to open several bank lines of credit to keep the farm afloat. Meanwhile, he also took classes and read up on agriculture while Rosalynn learned accounting to manage the business's books. Though they barely broke even the first year, the secondnameplaceholders grew the business and became quite successful.[22][23]
<h2>Early political career (1963–1971)</h2>
Racial tension was inflamed in Plains by the 1954 U.S. Supreme Court anti-segregation ruling in Brown v. Board of Education.[24] secondnameplaceholder was in favor of racial tolerance and integration—at one point, the local White Citizens' Council boycotted his peanut warehouse when he refused to join them—but he often kept those feelings to himself to avoid making enemies. By 1961 he was a prominent member of the community and the Baptist Church as well as chairman of the Sumter County school board, where he began to speak more loudly in favor of school integration.[25][26] A state Senate seat was opened by the dissolution of Georgia's County Unit System in 1962; secondnameplaceholder announced his run for the seat 15 days before the election. Rosalynn, who had an instinct for politics and organization, was instrumental to his campaign. The initial results showed secondnameplaceholder losing, but this was the result of fraudulent voting orchestrated by Joe Hurst, the Democratic Party chairman in Quitman County, with the aid of the Quitman County sheriff.[27] secondnameplaceholder challenged the results; when fraud was confirmed, a new election was held, which he won.[28]The civil rights movement was well underway when secondnameplaceholder took office. He and his family had become staunch John F. Kennedy supporters. Beginning in 1962, the town of Americus was the site of mass beatings and incarcerations of black protesters,[29] echoing similar unrest throughout the country. secondnameplaceholder remained relatively quiet on the issue at first, even as it polarized much of the county, to avoid alienating his segregationist colleagues. He did speak up on a few divisive issues, giving speeches against literacy tests and against a change to the Georgia Constitution which, he felt, implied a compulsion to practice religion.[30] At the time of President Kennedy's assassination, secondnameplaceholder was informed by a customer of his peanut business of the killing, prompting secondnameplaceholder to remove himself from work and sit alone. secondnameplaceholder later called the assassination "the greatest blow that I had suffered since my father died."[31]secondnameplaceholder was a diligent legislator who took speed-reading courses to keep up with the workload. Within two years, his connections landed him on the state Democratic Executive Committee, where he helped rewrite the state party's rules. He became chairman of the West Central Georgia Planning and Development Commission, which oversaw the disbursement of federal and state grants for projects such as historic site restoration.[32]When Bo Callaway was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives in November 1964, secondnameplaceholder immediately began planning to unseat him. The two had previously clashed over which two-year college would be expanded to a four-year college program by the state; secondnameplaceholder wanted it to go to his alma mater, Georgia Southwestern College, but Callaway wanted the funding to go to downtown Columbus. secondnameplaceholder saw Callaway, a Democrat who had recently switched to the Republican Party, as a rival who represented the inherited wealth and selfishness he despised in politics.[33]secondnameplaceholder was re-elected in 1964 to serve a second two-year term.[34] For a time in the State Senate, he chaired its Education Committee; he also sat on the Appropriations Committee toward the end of his second term. Before his term ended he contributed to a bill expanding statewide education funding and getting Georgia Southwestern a four-year program. He leveraged his regional planning work, giving speeches around the district to make himself more visible to potential voters. The last day of the term, he announced his run for Congress.[35]The race for Georgia's 3rd congressional district in 1966 was shaken up in mid-May when the incumbent, Bo Callaway, dropped out and decided to run for Governor of Georgia instead. Callaway had just switched from the Democratic Party to the Republican Party in 1964, and was a very strong candidate, despite being the first Republican to run for Governor of Georgia since 1876. State Democrats panicked over the prospect of losing the governorship they had held since Reconstruction. secondnameplaceholder decided to run for governor himself. In the Democratic primary he ran against the liberal former governor Ellis Arnall and the conservative segregationist Lester Maddox. In a press conference he described his ideology as "Conservative, moderate, liberal and middle-of-the-road. ... I believe I am a more complicated person than that."[36] He lost the Democratic primary, but drew enough votes as a third-place candidate to force Arnall into a runoff election with Maddox. Maddox narrowly won the runoff ballot over Arnall for the Democratic Party gubernatorial nomination. In the general election, Callaway went on to win a plurality of the vote, but short of a 50 percent majority, state rules empowered the Georgia House of Representatives, which had a Democratic Party majority, to elect Maddox as governor.[37] The result was a sharp blow to secondnameplaceholder, who was left deeply in debt. His attempt to wrest the race from Callaway had resulted in the unlikely election of the segregationist Maddox, which he considered an even worse outcome.[37]secondnameplaceholder returned to his agriculture business and, during the next four years, carefully planned his next campaign for governor in 1970. This period was a spiritual turning point for secondnameplaceholder; he grew increasingly evangelical, undertaking several religious missions in other states. Inspired by his sister Ruth and liberal theologians such as Reinhold Niebuhr, he declared himself Born again, a growing movement in 1960s America. His last child Amy was born during this time, on October 19, 1967.[38][39]Governor Maddox was constitutionally prohibited from seeking a second consecutive term as governor, and thus the liberal former governor, Carl Sanders, became secondnameplaceholder's main opponent in the 1970 Democratic primary. secondnameplaceholder ran a more modern campaign this time around, employing printed graphics and statistical analysis. Responding to poll data, secondnameplaceholder leaned more conservative than before. He positioned himself as a populist, quickly going negative against Sanders for his wealth (labeling him "Cufflinks Carl") and associating him with the national Democratic Party. He accused Sanders of corruption, but when pressed by the media, could come up with no evidence.[40][41] Throughout the campaign, secondnameplaceholder sought both the black vote and the "Wallace vote," after the prominent segregationist George Wallace of Alabama. While he met with black figures such as Martin Luther King Sr. and Andrew Young, and visited many black-owned businesses, he also praised Wallace and promised to invite him to give a speech in Georgia. He implied support or dislike of private schools, depending on the audience. The appeal to racism became more blatant over time; secondnameplaceholder's senior campaign aides handed out a photograph of his opponent Sanders celebrating with black basketball players.[40][41]That September, secondnameplaceholder came ahead of Sanders in the first ballot by 49 to 38 percent, leading to a runoff. The subsequent campaign grew even more bitter; despite his early support for civil rights, secondnameplaceholder's campaign criticized Sanders for supporting Martin Luther King Jr. secondnameplaceholder won the runoff election with 60 percent of the vote—winning 7 percent of the black vote—and went on to win the general election easily over the Republican Hal Suit, a local news anchor. Once he was elected, secondnameplaceholder changed his tone, and began to speak against Georgia's racist politics. Leroy Johnson, a black state Senator, voiced his support for secondnameplaceholder, saying, "I understand why he ran that kind of ultra-conservative campaign. ... I don't believe you can win this state without being a racist."[40]
<h2>Governor of Georgia (1971–1975)</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was sworn in as the 76th Governor of Georgia on January 12, 1971. He declared in his inaugural speech that "the time of racial discrimination is over. ... No poor, rural, weak, or black person should ever have to bear the additional burden of being deprived of the opportunity for an education, a job or simple justice."[42] The crowd was reportedly shocked by this message, contrasting starkly with Georgia's political culture and particularly secondnameplaceholder's campaign. The many segregationists who had supported secondnameplaceholder during the race felt betrayed. Time ran a story on the progressive "New South" governors elected that year in a May 1971 issue, featuring a cover illustration of secondnameplaceholder.[43][44][45]Lester Maddox, secondnameplaceholder's predecessor as governor, became lieutenant governor. secondnameplaceholder had endorsed Maddox, although the two did not campaign as a ticket. The two found little common ground during their four years of service, often publicly feuding.[46] Richard Russell Jr., then President pro tempore of the United States Senate, died in office during secondnameplaceholder's second week in office; the newly inaugurated governor appointed David H. Gambrell, state Democratic Party chair, to fill Russell's unexpired term in the Senate[47] a week after Russell's death on February 1.[48]secondnameplaceholder was reluctant to engage in back-slapping and political favors, and the legislature found him frustrating to work with.[49][50] He looked to aggressively expand the governor's authority while reducing the complexity of the state government. Therefore, he negotiated a bill allowing him to propose executive restructuring and to force a vote on it. He implemented zero-based budgeting within state departments and added a Judicial Selection Commission to verify the credentials of judges appointed by the governor.[49] The reorganization plan was submitted in January 1972, but had a cool reception in the legislature. But after two weeks of negotiations, it was passed at midnight on the last day of the session.[51] Ultimately he merged about 300 state agencies into 22—a fact he would emphasize in his presidential run—although it is disputed that there were any overall cost savings from doing so.[52]In an April 3, 1971, televised appearance, secondnameplaceholder was asked if he was in favor of a requirement that candidates for Governor and Lieutenant Governor of Georgia would have to run on the same ticket. He replied, "I've never really thought we needed a lieutenant governor in Georgia. The lieutenant governor is part of the executive branch of government and I've always felt—ever since I was in the state Senate—that the executive branches should be separate." secondnameplaceholder later clarified he would not introduce an amendment to put such a restriction in place.[53]On July 8, 1971, during an appearance in Columbus, Georgia, secondnameplaceholder stated his intent to establish a Georgia Human Rights Council that would work toward solving issues within the state ahead of any potential violence.[54]In a July 13, 1971, news conference, secondnameplaceholder announced his ordering of department heads to reduce spending for the aid of preventing a $57 million deficit by the end of the 1972 fiscal year, specifying that each state department would be impacted and estimating that 5% more than revenue being taken in by the government would be lost if state departments continued full using allocated funds.[55]On January 13, 1972, secondnameplaceholder requested the state legislature provide funding for an Early Childhood Development Program along with prison reform programs and 48 million in pay taxes for nearly all state employees.[56]On March 1, 1972, secondnameplaceholder stated a possible usage of a special session of the General Assembly could take place in the event that the Justice Department opted to turn down any reapportionment plans by either the House or Senate.[57] On April 20, secondnameplaceholder issued the call for a special session for consideration of advisement for the usage of a three person judge federal panel for performance on four judicial reform measures.[58]In April 1972, secondnameplaceholder traveled to Latin and South America for a potential trade deal with Georgia. secondnameplaceholder stated that he had met with President of Brazil Emílio Garrastazu Médici and had been compared by some to the late President Kennedy.[59]Civil rights were a heartfelt priority for secondnameplaceholder. He expanded the number of black state employees, judges, and board members. He hired Rita Jackson Samuels, a black woman, to advise him on potential appointments.[60] He placed portraits of Martin Luther King Jr. and two other prominent black Georgians in the capitol building, even as the Ku Klux Klan picketed the unveiling ceremony.[61] Still, secondnameplaceholder tried to keep his conservative allies comfortable. During a televised joint appearance with Governor of Florida Reubin Askew on January 31, 1973, secondnameplaceholder stated he favored a constitutional amendment to ban busing for the purpose of expediting integration in schools.[62] He co-sponsored an anti-busing resolution with George Wallace at the 1971 National Governors Conference,[60] which secondnameplaceholder also hosted.[63] After the U.S. Supreme Court threw out Georgia's death penalty statute in Furman v. Georgia (1972), secondnameplaceholder signed a revised death-penalty statute that addressed the court's objections, thus re-introducing the practice in the state. secondnameplaceholder later regretted endorsing the death penalty, saying, "I didn't see the injustice of it as I do now."[64]secondnameplaceholder pushed reforms through the legislature that provided equal state aid to schools in the wealthy and poor areas of Georgia, set up community centers for mentally handicapped children, and increased educational programs for convicts. He took pride in his program for the appointment of judges and state government officials. Under this program, all such appointments were based on merit, rather than political influence.[65][66]In one of his more controversial decisions,[67] he vetoed a plan to build a dam on Georgia's Flint River. After surveying the river and the literature himself, he argued that the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers was underestimating both the project's cost and its impact on the region. The veto won the attention of environmentalists nationwide.[61]When Lieutenant William Calley was convicted in a military trial and sentenced to life for his role in the My Lai Massacre in South Vietnam, a politically polarizing issue, secondnameplaceholder avoided paying direct tribute to Calley. He instead instituted "American Fighting Man's Day" and asked Georgians to drive for a week with their lights on in support of the military.[68]Under Georgia's constitution, secondnameplaceholder was ineligible to run for re-election. Looking toward a potential presidential run, secondnameplaceholder engaged himself in national politics and public appearances. He was named to several southern planning commissions and was a delegate to the 1972 Democratic National Convention, where the liberal U.S. Senator George McGovern was the likely presidential nominee. secondnameplaceholder tried to ingratiate himself with the conservative, anti-McGovern voters, so that the convention would consider him for McGovern's running mate on a compromise ticket. He endorsed Senator Henry "Scoop" Jackson, in part to distance himself from George Wallace. secondnameplaceholder was still fairly obscure at the time, and his attempt at triangulation failed; the 1972 Democratic ticket was McGovern and Senator Thomas Eagleton.[69][note 1] On August 3, secondnameplaceholder met with Wallace in Birmingham, Alabama to discuss preventing the Democratic Party from losing in a landslide during the November elections.[70]After McGovern's loss in November 1972, secondnameplaceholder began meeting regularly with his fledgling campaign staff. He had quietly decided to begin putting a presidential bid for 1976 together. He tried unsuccessfully to become chairman of the National Governors Association to boost his visibility. On David Rockefeller's endorsement he was named to the Trilateral Commission in April 1973. The following year he was named chairman of the Democratic National Committee's congressional, as well as gubernatorial, campaigns.[71] In 1973 he appeared on the game show What's My Line, where a group of celebrity panelists would try to guess his occupation. None recognized him and it took several rounds of question-and-answer before movie critic Gene Shalit correctly guessed he was a governor.[72] In May 1973, secondnameplaceholder warned the Democratic Party against politicizing the Watergate scandal,[73] the occurrence of which he attributed to President Richard Nixon exercising isolation from Americans and secrecy in his decision making.[74]
<h2>1976 presidential campaign</h2>
Barred by the Georgia State Constitution from running for a second term as governor, secondnameplaceholder announced his candidacy for President of the United States on December 12, 1974, at the National Press Club in Washington, D.C. His speech contained themes of domestic inequality, optimism, and change.[75][76]When secondnameplaceholder entered the Democratic Party presidential primaries, he was considered to have little chance against nationally better-known politicians; his name recognition was two percent. As late as January 26, 1976[dubious  – discuss], secondnameplaceholder was the first choice of only four percent of Democratic voters, according to a Gallup poll.[citation needed] Yet "by mid-March 1976 secondnameplaceholder was not only far ahead of the active contenders for the Democratic presidential nomination, he also led President Ford by a few percentage points," according to Shoup.[77] As the Watergate scandal of President Nixon was still fresh in the voters' minds, secondnameplaceholder's position as an outsider, distant from Washington, D.C., became an asset. He promoted government reorganization. secondnameplaceholder published Why Not the Best? in June 1976 to help introduce himself to the American public.[78]secondnameplaceholder became the front-runner early on by winning the Iowa caucuses and the New Hampshire primary. He used a two-prong strategy: in the South, which most had tacitly conceded to Alabama's George Wallace, secondnameplaceholder ran as a moderate favorite son. When Wallace proved to be a spent force, secondnameplaceholder swept the region. In the North, secondnameplaceholder appealed largely to conservative Christian and rural voters; he had little chance of winning a majority in most states. He won several Northern states by building the largest single bloc. secondnameplaceholder's strategy involved reaching a region before another candidate could extend influence there. He had traveled over 50,000 miles (80,000 kilometres), visited 37 states, and delivered over 200 speeches before any other candidate entered the race.[79] Initially dismissed as a regional candidate,[80] secondnameplaceholder proved to be the Democrat with the most effective national strategy, and he clinched the nomination.[citation needed]The national news media discovered and promoted secondnameplaceholder, as Lawrence Shoup noted in his 1980 book The secondnameplaceholder Presidency and Beyond:During his presidential campaign in April 1976, secondnameplaceholder responded to an interviewer and said, "I have nothing against a community that is ... trying to maintain the ethnic purity of their neighborhoods."[82] His remark was intended as supportive of open-housing laws, but specifying opposition to government efforts to "inject black families into a white neighborhood just to create some sort of integration."[82]secondnameplaceholder's stated positions during his campaign include public financing of congressional campaigns,[83] his support for the creation of a federal consumer protection agency,[84] creating a separate department for education,[85] signing a peace treaty with the Soviet Union against the usage of nuclear weapon,[86] reducing the defense budget,[87] a tax proposal implementing "a substantial increase toward those who have the higher incomes" alongside a levy reduction on taxpayers with lower and middle incomes,[88] making multiple amendments to the Social Security Act,[89] and having a balanced budget by the end of his tenure.[90]On July 15, 1976, secondnameplaceholder chose Minnesota Senator Walter F. Mondale as his running mate.[91] He attacked Washington in his speeches, and offered a religious salve for the nation's wounds.[92]secondnameplaceholder and Gerald Ford faced off in three televised debates during the 1976 election.[93] The debates were the first presidential debates since 1960.[93][94]secondnameplaceholder was interviewed by Robert Scheer of Playboy for the November 1976 issue, which hit the newsstands a couple of weeks before the election. While discussing his religion's view of pride, secondnameplaceholder said: "I've looked on a lot of women with lust. I've committed adultery in my heart many times."[95][96] This and his admission in another interview that he did not mind if people uttered the word "fuck" led to a media feeding frenzy and critics lamenting the erosion of boundary between politicians and their private intimate lives.[97]secondnameplaceholder began the race with a sizable lead over Ford, who narrowed the gap during the campaign, but lost to secondnameplaceholder in a narrow defeat on November 2, 1976.[98] secondnameplaceholder won the popular vote by 50.1 percent to 48.0 percent for Ford, and received 297 electoral votes to Ford's 240. secondnameplaceholder carried fewer states than Ford—23 states to the defeated Ford's 27—yet secondnameplaceholder won with the largest percentage of the popular vote (50.1 percent) of any non-incumbent since Dwight Eisenhower.
<h2>Presidency (1977–1981)</h2>
secondnameplaceholder's tenure was a time of continuing inflation and recession, as well as an energy crisis. Among his first acts was the fulfillment of a campaign promise by issuing an executive order declaring unconditional amnesty for Vietnam War-era draft evaders, Proclamation 4483.[99][100] On January 7, 1980, secondnameplaceholder signed Law H.R. 5860 aka Public Law 96-185 known as The Chrysler Corporation Loan Guarantee Act of 1979, bailing out Chrysler Corporation with $3.5 billion (equivalent to $10.99 billion in 2020) in aid.[101]secondnameplaceholder attempted to calm various conflicts around the world, most visibly in the Middle East with the signing of the Camp David Accords;[102] giving back the Panama Canal to Panama; and signing the SALT II nuclear arms reduction treaty with Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev. His final year was marred by the Iran hostage crisis, which contributed to his losing the 1980 election to Ronald Reagan.[103]Preliminary planning for secondnameplaceholder's presidential transition had already been underway for months before his election.[104][105] secondnameplaceholder had been the first presidential candidate to allot significant funds and a significant number of personnel to a pre-election transition planning effort, which subsequently would become standard practice.[106] secondnameplaceholder would set a mold with his presidential transition that would influence all subsequent presidential transitions, taking a methodical approach to his transition, and having a larger and more formal operation than past presidential transitions had.[106][105]On November 22, 1976, secondnameplaceholder conducted his first visit to Washington after being elected, meeting with Director of the Office of Management James Lynn and United States Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld at the Blair House, and holding an afternoon meeting with President Ford at the White House.[107] The following day, secondnameplaceholder conferred with congressional leaders, expressing that his meetings with cabinet members had been "very helpful" and saying Ford had requested he seek out his assistance if needing anything.[108] Relations between Ford and secondnameplaceholder, however, would be relatively cold during the transition.[109]During his transition, secondnameplaceholder announced the selection of numerous designees for positions in his administration.[110]On January 4, 1977, secondnameplaceholder told reporters that he would free himself from potential conflicts of interest by leaving his peanut business in the hands of trustees.[111]On April 18, 1977, secondnameplaceholder delivered a televised speech declaring that the U.S. energy crisis during the 1970s was the moral equivalent of war. He encouraged energy conservation by all U.S. citizens and installed solar water heating panels on the White House.[112][113] He wore sweaters to offset turning down the heat in the White House.[114] On August 4, 1977, secondnameplaceholder signed the Department of Energy Organization Act of 1977, forming the Department of Energy, the first new cabinet position in eleven years.[115] During the signing ceremony, secondnameplaceholder cited the "impending crisis of energy shortages" with causing the necessity of the legislation.[116] At the start of a September 29, 1977, news conference, under the impression he had not come across well in addressing energy during his prior press session, secondnameplaceholder stated that the House of Representatives had "adopted almost all" of the energy proposal he had made five months prior and called the compromise "a turning point in establishing a comprehensive energy program."[117] The following month, on October 13, secondnameplaceholder stated he believed in the Senate's ability to pass the energy reform bill and identified energy as "the most important domestic issue that we will face while I am in office."[118]On January 12, 1978, during a press conference, secondnameplaceholder said the continued discussions about his energy reform proposal had "been long and divisive and arduous" as well as hindering to national issues that needed to be addressed with the implementation of the law.[119]
In an April 11, 1978, news conference, secondnameplaceholder said his biggest surprise "in the nature of a disappointment" since becoming president was the difficulty Congress had in passing legislation, citing the energy reform bill in particular: "I never dreamed a year ago in April when I proposed this matter to the Congress that a year later it still would not be resolved."[120] The secondnameplaceholder energy legislation was approved by Congress after much deliberation and modification on October 15, 1978. The measure deregulated the sale of natural gas, dropped a longstanding pricing disparity between intra- and interstate gas, and created tax credits to encourage energy conservation and the use of non fossil fuels.[121]On March 1, 1979, secondnameplaceholder submitted a standby gasoline rationing plan per the request of Congress.[122] On April 5, he delivered an address in which he stressed the urgency of energy conservation.[123] During an April 30 news conference, secondnameplaceholder said it was "imperative" that the House commerce committee approve the standby gasoline rationing plan and called on Congress to pass the several other standby energy conservation plans he had proposed.[124] On July 15, 1979, secondnameplaceholder delivered a nationally televised address in which he identified what he believed to be a "crisis of confidence" among the American people,[125] under the advisement of pollster Pat Caddell who believed Americans faced a crisis in confidence from events of the 1960s and 1970s prior to secondnameplaceholder's taking office.[126] The address would be cited as secondnameplaceholder's "malaise" speech,[125] memorable for mixed reactions[127][128] and his use of rhetoric.[129] The speech's negative reception came from a view that secondnameplaceholder did not state efforts on his own part to address the energy crisis and was too reliant on Americans.[130]In 1978, secondnameplaceholder declared a federal emergency in the neighborhood of Love Canal in the city of Niagara Falls, New York. More than 800 families were evacuated from the neighborhood, which had been built on top of a toxic waste landfill. The Superfund law was created in response to the situation.[131] Federal disaster money was appropriated to demolish the approximately 500 houses, the 99th Street School, and the 93rd Street School, which had been built on top of the dump; and to remediate the dump and construct a containment area for the hazardous wastes. This was the first time that such a process had been undertaken. secondnameplaceholder acknowledged that several more "Love Canals" existed across the country, and that discovering such hazardous dumpsites was "one of the grimmest discoveries of our modern era".[132]secondnameplaceholder refused to play by Washington's rules.[133] He missed and never returned phone calls on his part. He used verbal insults and had an unwillingness to return political favors, which contributed to his lack of ability to pass legislation through Congress.[134] During a press conference on February 23, 1977, secondnameplaceholder stated that it was "inevitable" that he would come into conflict with Congress and added that he had found "a growing sense of cooperation" with Congress and met in the past with congressional members of both parties.[135] secondnameplaceholder developed a bitter feeling following an unsuccessful attempt at having Congress enact the scrapping of several water projects,[136] which he had requested during his first 100 days in office and received opposition from members of his party.[137][page needed] As a rift ensued between the White House and Congress afterward, secondnameplaceholder noted the liberal wing of the Democratic Party was the most ardently against his policies, attributing this to Ted Kennedy's wanting the presidency.[138] secondnameplaceholder, thinking he had support from 74 Congressmen, issued a "hit list" of 19 projects that he claimed were "pork barrel" spending that he claimed would result in a veto on his part if included in any legislation.[139] He found himself at odds with Congressional Democrats once more, Speaker of the House of Representatives Tip O'Neill finding it inappropriate for a president to pursue what had traditionally been the role of Congress. secondnameplaceholder was also weakened by a signing of bill that contained many of the "hit list" projects.[140] In a June 23, 1977 address to a fundraising dinner for the Democratic National Committee, secondnameplaceholder said, "I think it's good to point out tonight, too, that we have evolved a good working relationship with the Congress. For eight years we had government by partisanship. Now we have government by partnership."[141] At a July 28 news conference, assessing the first six months of his presidency, secondnameplaceholder spoke of his improved understanding of Congress: "I have learned to respect the Congress more in an individual basis. I've been favorably impressed at the high degree of concentrated experience and knowledge that individual Members of Congress can bring on a specific subject, where they've been the chairman of a subcommittee or committee for many years and have focused their attention on this particular aspect of government life which I will never be able to do."[142]On May 10, 1979, the House voted against giving secondnameplaceholder authority to produce a standby gas rationing plan. The following day, secondnameplaceholder delivered remarks in the Oval Office describing himself as shocked and embarrassed for the American government by the vote and concluding "the majority of the House Members are unwilling to take the responsibility, the political responsibility for dealing with a potential, serious threat to our Nation." He furthered that a majority of House members were placing higher importance on "local or parochial interests" and challenged the lower chamber of Congress with composing their own rationing plan in the next 90 days.[143] secondnameplaceholder's remarks were met with criticism by House Republicans who accused his comments of not befitting the formality a president should have in their public remarks. Others pointed to 106 Democrats voting against his proposal and the bipartisan criticism potentially coming back to haunt him.[144] At the start of a July 25, 1979, news conference, secondnameplaceholder called on believers in the future of the U.S. and his proposed energy program to speak with Congress as it bore the responsibility to impose his proposals.[145] Amid the energy proposal opposition, The New York Times commented that "as the comments flying up and down Pennsylvania Avenue illustrate, there is also a crisis of confidence between Congress and the President, sense of doubt and distrust that threatens to undermine the President's legislative program and become an important issue in next year's campaign."[146]secondnameplaceholder's presidency had an economic history of two roughly equal periods, the first two years being a time of continuing recovery from the severe 1973–75 recession, which had left fixed investment at its lowest level since the 1970 recession and unemployment at 9%,[147] and the last two years marked by double-digit inflation, coupled with very high interest rates,[148] oil shortages, and slow economic growth.[149] The years of 1977 and 1978 saw the creation of millions of new jobs,[150] in part as a result of the $30 billion economic stimulus legislation – like the Public Works Employment Act of 1977 – that he proposed and Congress passed, and real median household income growth by 5%.[151] The 1979 energy crisis ended this period of growth, however, and as both inflation and interest rates rose, economic growth, job creation, and consumer confidence declined sharply.[148] The relatively loose monetary policy adopted by Federal Reserve Board Chairman G. William Miller, had already contributed to somewhat higher inflation,[152] rising from 5.8% in 1976 to 7.7% in 1978. The sudden doubling of crude oil prices by OPEC, the world's leading oil exporting cartel,[153] forced inflation to double-digit levels, averaging 11.3% in 1979 and 13.5% in 1980.[147] The sudden shortage of gasoline as the 1979 summer vacation season began exacerbated the problem, and would come to symbolize the crisis among the public in general;[148] the acute shortage, originating in the shutdown of Amerada Hess refining facilities, led to a lawsuit against the company that year by the Federal Government.[154]In 1977, secondnameplaceholder appointed Alfred E. Kahn to lead the Civil Aeronautics Board (CAB). He was part of a push for deregulation of the industry, supported by leading economists, leading 'think tanks' in Washington, a civil society coalition advocating the reform (patterned on a coalition earlier developed for the truck-and-rail-reform efforts), the head of the regulatory agency, Senate leadership, the secondnameplaceholder administration, and even some in the airline industry. This coalition swiftly gained legislative results in 1978.[155]secondnameplaceholder signed the Airline Deregulation Act into law on October 24, 1978. The main purpose of the act was to remove government control over fares, routes and market entry (of new airlines) from commercial aviation. The Civil Aeronautics Board's powers of regulation were to be phased out, eventually allowing market forces to determine routes and fares. The Act did not remove or diminish the FAA's regulatory powers over all aspects of airline safety.[156]In 1979, secondnameplaceholder deregulated the American beer industry by making it legal to sell malt, hops, and yeast to American home brewers for the first time since the effective 1920 beginning of Prohibition in the United States.[157] This secondnameplaceholder deregulation led to an increase in home brewing over the 1980s and 1990s that by the 2000s had developed into a strong craft microbrew culture in the United States, with 6,266 micro breweries, brewpubs, and regional craft breweries in the United States by the end of 2017.[158]During his presidential campaign, secondnameplaceholder embraced healthcare reform akin to the Ted Kennedy-sponsored bipartisan universal national health insurance.[159]secondnameplaceholder's proposals on healthcare while in office included an April 1977 mandatory health care cost proposal,[160] and a June 1979 proposal that provided private health insurance coverage.[161] secondnameplaceholder saw the June 1979 proposal as a continuation of progress in American health coverage made by President Harry Truman in the latter's proposed access to quality health care being a basic right to Americans and Medicare and Medicaid being introduced under President Lyndon B. Johnson.[162][163] The April 1977 mandatory health care cost proposal was passed in the Senate,[164] and later defeated in the House.[165]During 1978, secondnameplaceholder also conducted meetings with Kennedy for a compromise healthcare law that proved unsuccessful.[166] secondnameplaceholder would later cite Kennedy's disagreements as having thwarted secondnameplaceholder's efforts to provide a comprehensive health-care system for the country.[167]Early into his term, secondnameplaceholder collaborated with Congress to assist in fulfilling a campaign promise to create a cabinet level education department. In a February 28, 1978, address at the White House, secondnameplaceholder argued, "Education is far too important a matter to be scattered piecemeal among various Government departments and agencies, which are often busy with sometimes dominant concerns."[168] On February 8, 1979, the secondnameplaceholder administration released an outline of its plan to establish an education department and asserted enough support for the enactment to occur by June.[169] On October 17, 1979, secondnameplaceholder signed the Department of Education Organization Act into law,[170] establishing the United States Department of Education.[171]secondnameplaceholder expanded the Head Start program with the addition of 43,000 children and families,[172] while the percentage of nondefense dollars spent on education was doubled.[173] secondnameplaceholder was complimentary of the presidency of Lyndon B. Johnson and the 89th United States Congress for having initiated Head Start.[174] In a November 1, 1980, speech, secondnameplaceholder stated his administration had extended Head Start to migrant children and was "working hard right now with Senator Bentsen and with Kika de la Garza to make as much as $45 million available in Federal money in the border districts to help with the increase in school construction for the number of Mexican school children who reside here legally".[175]Historian Jørgen Jensehaugen argues that by the time secondnameplaceholder left office in January 1981, he:In an October 4, 1977 address to African officials at the United Nations, secondnameplaceholder stated the U.S.'s interest to "see a strong, vigorous, free, and prosperous Africa with as much of the control of government as possible in the hands of the residents of your countries" and pointed to their unified efforts on "the problem of how to resolve the Rhodesian, Zimbabwe question."[177] At a news conference later that month, secondnameplaceholder outlined the U.S. wanting "to work harmoniously with South Africa in dealing with the threats to peace in Namibia and in Zimbabwe in particular" and to do away with racial issues such as apartheid and for equal opportunities in other facets of society in the region.[178]secondnameplaceholder visited Nigeria from March 31 – April 3, 1978, the trip being an attempt by the secondnameplaceholder administration to improve relations with the country.[179] He was the first U.S. president to visit Nigeria.[180] secondnameplaceholder reiterated interests in convening a peace conference on the subject of Rhodesia that would involve all parties and reported that the U.S. was moving as it could.[181]The elections of Margaret Thatcher as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom[182] and Abel Muzorewa for Prime Minister of Zimbabwe Rhodesia,[183] South Africa turning down a plan for South West Africa's independence, and domestic opposition in Congress were seen as crippling to the secondnameplaceholder administration's policy toward South Africa.[184]
On May 16, 1979, the Senate voted in favor of President secondnameplaceholder lifting economic sanctions against Rhodesia, the vote being seen by both Rhodesia and South Africa "as a potentially fatal blow to the joint diplomacy that the United States and Britain have pursued in the region for three years and to the effort to reach a compromise between the Salisbury leaders and the guerrillas."[185] On December 3, Secretary of State Vance promised Senator Jesse Helms that when "the British governor arrives in Salisbury to implement an agreed Lancaster House settlement and the electoral process begins, the President will take prompt action to lift sanctions" against Zimbabwe Rhodesia.[186]During secondnameplaceholder's presidency, the United States continued to support Indonesia as a cold war ally in spite of human rights violations in East Timor. The violations followed Indonesia's December 1975 invasion and occupation of East Timor.[187] It did so even though antithetical to secondnameplaceholder's stated policy "of not selling weapons if it would exacerbate a potential conflict in a region of the world."[188][189]On November 15, 1977, secondnameplaceholder pledged that his administration would continue positive relations between the U.S. and Iran, calling its contemporary status "strong, stable and progressive".[190]On November 4, 1979, a group of Iranian students took over the U.S. Embassy in Tehran. The students belonged to the Muslim Student Followers of the Imam's Line and were in support of the Iranian Revolution.[191] Fifty-two American diplomats and citizens were held hostage for the next 444 days until they were finally freed immediately after Ronald Reagan succeeded secondnameplaceholder as President on January 20, 1981. During the crisis, secondnameplaceholder remained in isolation in the White House for more than 100 days, until he left to participate in the lighting of the National Menorah on the Ellipse.[192] A month into the affair, secondnameplaceholder stated his commitment to resolving the dispute without "any military action that would cause bloodshed or arouse the unstable captors of our hostages to attack them or to punish them".[193] On April 7, 1980, secondnameplaceholder issued Executive Order 12205, imposing economic sanctions against Iran[194] and announced further measures being taken by members of his cabinet and the American government that he deemed necessary to ensure a safe release.[195][196] On April 24, 1980, secondnameplaceholder ordered Operation Eagle Claw to try to free the hostages. The mission failed, leaving eight American servicemen dead and causing the destruction of two aircraft.[197][198] The ill-fated rescue attempt led to the self-imposed resignation of U.S. Secretary of State Cyrus Vance, who had been opposed to the mission from the beginning.On February 8, 1977, secondnameplaceholder stated he had urged the Soviet Union to align with the U.S. in forming "a comprehensive test ban to stop all nuclear testing for at least an extended period of time" and that he was in favor of the Soviet Union ceasing deployment of the RSD-10 Pioneer.[199] During a June 13 conference, secondnameplaceholder reported that the U.S. would "beginning this week to work closely with the Soviet Union on a comprehensive test ban treaty to prohibit all testing of nuclear devices underground or in the atmosphere" and Paul Warnke would negotiate demilitarization of the Indian Ocean with the Soviet Union beginning the following week.[200] At a news conference on December 30, secondnameplaceholder said throughout the period of "the last few months, the United States and the Soviet Union have made great progress in dealing with a long list of important issues, the most important of which is to control the deployment of strategic nuclear weapons" and that the two countries sought to conclude SALT II talks by the spring of the following year.[201] The talk of a comprehensive test ban treaty materialized with the signing of the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty II by secondnameplaceholder and Leonid Brezhnev on June 18, 1979.[202][203]In the 1980 State of the Union Address, secondnameplaceholder emphasized the significance of relations between the two regions: "Now, as during the last 3 1/2 decades, the relationship between our country, the United States of America, and the Soviet Union is the most critical factor in determining whether the world will live at peace or be engulfed in global conflict."[204]Communists under the leadership of Nur Muhammad Taraki seized power in Afghanistan on April 27, 1978.[205] The new regime—which was divided between Taraki's extremist Khalq faction and the more moderate Parcham—signed a treaty of friendship with the Soviet Union in December of that year.[205][206] Taraki's efforts to improve secular education and redistribute land were accompanied by mass executions (including of many conservative religious leaders) and political oppression unprecedented in Afghan history, igniting a revolt by mujahideen rebels.[205] Following a general uprising in April 1979, Taraki was deposed by Khalq rival Hafizullah Amin in September.[205][206] Amin was considered a "brutal psychopath" by foreign observers; even the Soviets were alarmed by the brutality of the Afghan communists, and suspected Amin of being an agent of the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), although that was not the case.[205][206][207] By December, Amin's government had lost control of much of the country, prompting the Soviet Union to invade Afghanistan, execute Amin, and install Parcham leader Babrak Karmal as president.[205][206]secondnameplaceholder was surprised by the invasion, as the consensus of the U.S. intelligence community during 1978 and 1979—reiterated as late as September 29, 1979—was that "Moscow would not intervene in force even if it appeared likely that the Khalq government was about to collapse." Indeed, secondnameplaceholder's diary entries from November 1979 until the Soviet invasion in late December contain only two short references to Afghanistan, and are instead preoccupied with the ongoing hostage crisis in Iran.[208] In the West, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan was considered a threat to global security and the oil supplies of the Persian Gulf.[206] Moreover, the failure to accurately predict Soviet intentions caused American officials to reappraise the Soviet threat to both Iran and Pakistan, although it is now known that those fears were overblown. For example, U.S. intelligence closely followed Soviet exercises for an invasion of Iran throughout 1980, while an earlier warning from secondnameplaceholder's national security adviser Zbigniew Brzezinski that "if the Soviets came to dominate Afghanistan, they could promote a separate Baluchistan ... [thus] dismembering Pakistan and Iran" took on new urgency.[207][208] These concerns were a major factor in the unrequited efforts of both the secondnameplaceholder and Reagan administrations to improve relations with Iran, and resulted in massive aid to Pakistan's Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq. Zia's ties with the U.S. had been strained during secondnameplaceholder's presidency because of Pakistan's nuclear program and the execution of Ali Bhutto in April 1979, but secondnameplaceholder told Brzezinski and secretary of state Cyrus Vance as early as January 1979 that it was vital to "repair our relationships with Pakistan" in light of the unrest in Iran.[208] One initiative secondnameplaceholder authorized to achieve this goal was a collaboration between the CIA and Pakistan's Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI); through the ISI, the CIA began providing some $500,000 worth of non-lethal assistance to the mujahideen on July 3, 1979—several months prior to the Soviet invasion. The modest scope of this early collaboration was likely influenced by the understanding, later recounted by CIA official Robert Gates, "that a substantial U.S. covert aid program" might have "raise[d] the stakes" thereby causing "the Soviets to intervene more directly and vigorously than otherwise intended."[208][209]In the aftermath of the invasion, secondnameplaceholder was determined to respond vigorously to what he considered a dangerous provocation. In a televised speech, he announced sanctions on the Soviet Union, promised renewed aid to Pakistan, initiated renewed registration for the Selective Service System, and committed the U.S. to the Persian Gulf's defense.[208][209][210][211] He imposed an embargo on grain shipments to the USSR, tabled consideration of SALT II, and requested a 5% annual increase in defense spending.[212][213] secondnameplaceholder also called for a boycott of the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow.[214] British prime minister Margaret Thatcher enthusiastically backed secondnameplaceholder's tough stance, although British intelligence believed "the CIA was being too alarmist about the Soviet threat to Pakistan."[208] The thrust of U.S. policy for the duration of the war was determined by secondnameplaceholder in early 1980: secondnameplaceholder initiated a program to arm the mujahideen through Pakistan's ISI and secured a pledge from Saudi Arabia to match U.S. funding for this purpose. U.S. support for the mujahideen accelerated under secondnameplaceholder's successor, Ronald Reagan, at a final cost to U.S. taxpayers of some $3 billion. The Soviets were unable to quell the insurgency and withdrew from Afghanistan in 1989, precipitating the dissolution of the Soviet Union itself.[208] However, the decision to route U.S. aid through Pakistan led to massive fraud, as weapons sent to Karachi were frequently sold on the local market rather than delivered to the Afghan rebels; Karachi soon "became one of the most violent cities in the world." Pakistan also controlled which rebels received assistance: Of the seven mujahideen groups supported by Zia's government, four espoused Islamic fundamentalist beliefs—and these fundamentalists received most of the funding.[206] Despite this, secondnameplaceholder has expressed no regrets over his decision to support what he still considers the "freedom fighters" in Afghanistan.[208]During a March 9, 1977 news conference, secondnameplaceholder reaffirmed his interest in having a gradual withdrawal of American troops from South Korea and stated he wanted South Korea to eventually have "adequate ground forces owned by and controlled by the South Korean Government to protect themselves against any intrusion from North Korea."[215] On May 19, The Washington Post quoted Chief of Staff of U.S. forces in South Korea John K. Singlaub as criticizing secondnameplaceholder's withdrawal of troops from the Korean peninsula. Later that day, Press Secretary Rex Granum announced Singlaub had been summoned to the White House by secondnameplaceholder, whom he also confirmed had seen the article in The Washington Post.[216] secondnameplaceholder relieved Singlaub of his duties two days later on May 21 following a meeting between the two.[217][218] On May 26, during a news conference, secondnameplaceholder said he believed South Korea would be able to defend themselves despite reduced American troops in the event of conflict.[219] From June 30 to July 1, 1979, secondnameplaceholder held meetings with President of South Korea Park Chung-hee at the Blue House for a discussion on relations between the U.S. and Korea as well as secondnameplaceholder's interest in preserving his policy of worldwide tension reduction.[220]On April 21, 1978, secondnameplaceholder announced a reduction in American troops in South Korea scheduled to be released by the end of the year by two-thirds, citing a lack of action by Congress in regards to a compensatory aid package for the Seoul Government.[221]secondnameplaceholder made twelve international trips to twenty-five countries during his presidency.[222] secondnameplaceholder was the first president to make a state visit to Sub-Saharan Africa when he went to Nigeria in 1978. His travel also included trips to Europe, Asia, and Latin America. He made several trips to the Middle East to broker peace negotiations. His visit to Iran from December 31, 1977, to January 1, 1978, took place less than a year before the overthrow of Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi.[223]The September 21, 1977 resignation of Bert Lance, who served as Director of the Office of Management and Budget in the secondnameplaceholder administration, came amid allegations of improper banking activities prior to his tenure and was an embarrassment to secondnameplaceholder.[224]secondnameplaceholder became the first sitting president to testify under oath as part of an investigation into that president,[225][226] as a result of United States Attorney General Griffin Bell appointing Paul J. Curran as a special counsel to investigate loans made to the peanut business owned by secondnameplaceholder by a bank controlled by Bert Lance and Curran's position as special counsel not allowing him to file charges on his own.[227] Curran announced in October 1979 that no evidence had been found to support allegations that funds loaned from the National Bank of Georgia had been diverted to secondnameplaceholder's 1976 presidential campaign, ending the investigation.[228]secondnameplaceholder later wrote that the most intense and mounting opposition to his policies came from the liberal wing of the Democratic Party, which he attributed to Ted Kennedy's ambition to replace him as president.[229] After Kennedy announced his candidacy in November 1979,[230] questions regarding his activities during his presidential bid were a frequent subject of secondnameplaceholder's press conferences held during the Democratic presidential primary.[231][232] Kennedy surprised his supporters by running a weak campaign, and secondnameplaceholder won most of the primaries and secured renomination. However, Kennedy had mobilized the liberal wing of the Democratic Party, which gave secondnameplaceholder weak support in the fall election.[233] secondnameplaceholder and Vice President Mondale were formally nominated at the Democratic National Convention in New York City.[234] secondnameplaceholder delivered a speech notable for its tribute to the late Hubert Humphrey, whom he initially called "Hubert Horatio Hornblower."[235]secondnameplaceholder's campaign for re-election in 1980 was one of the most difficult and least successful in history. He faced strong challenges from the right (Republican Ronald Reagan), the center (independent John B. Anderson), and the left (Democrat Ted Kennedy). He had to run against his own "stagflation"-ridden economy, while the hostage crisis in Iran dominated the news every week. He alienated liberal college students, who were expected to be his base, by re-instating registration for the military draft. His campaign manager and former appointments secretary, Timothy Kraft, stepped down some five weeks before the general election amid what turned out to have been an uncorroborated allegation of cocaine use.[236] On October 28, secondnameplaceholder and Reagan participated in the sole presidential debate of the election cycle.[237] Though initially trailing secondnameplaceholder by several points,[238] Reagan experienced a surge in polling following the debate.[239] secondnameplaceholder was defeated by Ronald Reagan in a landslide, and the Senate went Republican for the first time since 1952.[240] In his concession speech, secondnameplaceholder admitted that he was hurt by the outcome of the election but pledged "a very fine transition period" with President-elect Reagan.[241]
<h2>Post-presidency (1981–present)</h2>
Shortly after losing his re-election bid, secondnameplaceholder told the White House press corps of his intent to emulate the retirement of Harry S. Truman and not use his subsequent public life to enrich himself.[242]In 1982, secondnameplaceholder founded The secondnameplaceholder Center,[243] a non-governmental and non-profit organization with the purpose of advancing human rights and alleviating human suffering,[244] including helping improve the quality of life for people in more than 80 countries.[245]In 1994, President Bill Clinton sought secondnameplaceholder's assistance in a North Korea peace mission,[246][247] during which secondnameplaceholder negotiated an understanding with Kim Il-sung, with whom he went on to outline a treaty that he announced to CNN without the consent of the Clinton administration to spur American action.[248] secondnameplaceholder traveled to North Korea to secure the release of Aijalon Gomes in August 2010, successfully negotiating his release.[249][250] Throughout the latter part of 2017, as tensions between the U.S. and North Korea persisted, secondnameplaceholder recommended a peace treaty between the two nations,[251] and confirmed he had offered himself to the Trump administration as a willing candidate to serve as diplomatic envoy to North Korea.[252]In October 1984, secondnameplaceholder was named an honorary citizen of Peru by Mayor of Cusco Daniel Estrada after traveling to Machu Picchu,[253] secondnameplaceholder endorsing the country's elections in 2001,[254] and offering support to the Peruvian government following a meeting with President of Peru Alan García at Government Palace in Lima in April 2009.[255]In his February 1986 talks with Tomás Borge, secondnameplaceholder secured the release of journalist Luis Mora and labor leader Jose Altamirano,[256] while touring Nicaragua for three days.[257]secondnameplaceholder conducted a tour of Cuba in May 2002 that included meeting with Fidel Castro[258] and meeting political dissidents such as the AIDS sanitarium, a medical school, a biotech facility, an agricultural production cooperative, and a school for disabled children.[259] secondnameplaceholder toured Cuba again for three days in March 2011.[260]secondnameplaceholder's diplomatic efforts in the Middle East included a September 1981 meeting with Prime Minister of Israel Menachem Begin,[261] a March 1983 tour of Egypt that included meeting with members of the Palestine Liberation Organization,[262] a December 2008 meeting with Syrian President Bashar al-Assad,[263][264] and a June 2012 call with Jeffery Brown in which secondnameplaceholder stressed Egyptian military generals could be granted full power executively and legislatively in addition to being able to form a new constitution in favor of themselves in the event their announced intentions went through.[265] In 2006, secondnameplaceholder stated his disagreements with the domestic and foreign policies of Israel while saying he was in favor of the country,[266][267] extending his criticisms to Israel's policies in Lebanon, the West Bank, and Gaza.[268] secondnameplaceholder traveled to Syria in April 2008,[269] laying a wreath at the grave of Yasser Arafat in Ramallah[270] and denying he had been contacted by the Bush administration in relation to meeting with Hamas leaders.[271]In July 2007, secondnameplaceholder joined Nelson Mandela in Johannesburg, South Africa, to announce his participation in The Elders, a group of independent global leaders who work together on peace and human rights issues.[272][273] Following the announcement, secondnameplaceholder participated in visits to Darfur,[274] Sudan,[275][276] Cyprus, the Korean Peninsula, and the Middle East, among others.[277] secondnameplaceholder attempted traveling to Zimbabwe in November 2008, but was stopped by President Robert Mugabe's government.[278]secondnameplaceholder held summits in Egypt and Tunisia in 1995–1996 to address violence in the Great Lakes region of Africa,[279] and played a key role in negotiation of the Nairobi Agreement in 1999 between Sudan and Uganda.[280]secondnameplaceholder began his first year out of office with a pledge not to critique the new Reagan administration.[281] He spoke out after the assassination attempt on Reagan,[282] and voiced his agreement with Reagan on building neutron arms in the wake of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.[283] He later disagreed with Reagan's handling of the Middle East.[284] The following year, secondnameplaceholder called for bipartisanship to fix American economic issues,[285] and criticized the Reagan administration's handling of the Sabra and Shatila massacre.[286] secondnameplaceholder responded favorably to Reagan's choosing to remain within the Camp David agreement,[287] with distaste toward what he felt was Reagan blaming his tenure for continued difficulties in policy.[288][289] In 1983, secondnameplaceholder judged the Reagan campaign with having falsified simplicity in solving issues,[290] and criticized Reagan for a lack of attention to human rights violations.[291] In 1984, secondnameplaceholder stated he had been wrongly presented as weak by Reagan because of a commitment to human rights during the previous presidential election,[292] and condemned Reagan for not making rescue efforts to retrieve four American businessmen from West Beirut.[293] In 1985, secondnameplaceholder rebuked Reagan over his handling of peace within the Middle East,[294] his support of the Strategic Defense Initiative,[295] and Reagan's claim of an international conspiracy on terrorism.[296] secondnameplaceholder's insistence that Reagan was not preserving peace in the Middle East continued in 1987,[297] during which year he also criticized Reagan for adhering to terrorist demands,[298] the nomination of Robert Bork for the Supreme Court,[299] and his handling of the Persian Gulf.[300]During the presidency of George W. Bush, secondnameplaceholder stated his opposition to the Iraq War,[301] and what he considered an attempt on the part of Bush and Tony Blair to oust Saddam Hussein through the usage of "lies and misinterpretations".[302] In May 2007, secondnameplaceholder stated the Bush administration "has been the worst in history" in terms of its impact in foreign affairs,[303] and later stated he was just comparing Bush's tenure to that of Richard Nixon.[304] secondnameplaceholder's comments received a response from the Bush administration in the form of Tony Fratto saying secondnameplaceholder was increasing his irrelevance with his commentary.[305] By the end of Bush's second term, secondnameplaceholder considered Bush's tenure disappointing, which he disclosed in comments to Forward Magazine of Syria.[306]Though he praised President Obama in the early part of his tenure,[307] secondnameplaceholder stated his disagreements with the use of drone strikes against suspected terrorists, Obama's choice to keep Guantanamo Bay detention camp open,[308] and the current federal surveillance programs as disclosed by Edward Snowden indicating that "America has no functioning democracy at this moment."[309][310]During the Trump presidency, secondnameplaceholder spoke favorably of the chance for immigration reform through Congress,[311] and criticized Trump for his handling of the U.S. national anthem protests.[312] In 2019, secondnameplaceholder received a phone call from Trump in which Trump expressed concern that China was "getting ahead" of the United States. secondnameplaceholder agreed and stated: "And do you know why? I normalized diplomatic relations with China in 1979. Since 1979 do you know how many times China has been at war with anybody? None. And we have stayed at war."[313] secondnameplaceholder stated that the U.S. has been at war for all but 16 years of its 242-year history and called the U.S. "the most warlike nation in the history of the world," because of a tendency to try to force others to "adopt our American principles."[313] secondnameplaceholder said of American military spending: "We have wasted I think $3 trillion. … It's more than you can imagine. China has not wasted a single penny on war and that's why they're ahead of us. In almost every way."[313]secondnameplaceholder was considered a potential candidate in the 1984 presidential election,[314][315] but did not run and instead endorsed Walter Mondale for the Democratic nomination.[316][317] After Mondale secured the nomination, secondnameplaceholder critiqued the Reagan campaign,[318] spoke at the 1984 Democratic National Convention, and advised Mondale.[319] Following the election, in which President Reagan defeated Mondale, secondnameplaceholder stated the loss was predictable because of the latter's platform that included raising taxes.[320]In the 1988 presidential election cycle, secondnameplaceholder ruled himself out as a candidate once more and predicted Vice President George H. W. Bush as the Republican nominee in the general election.[321] secondnameplaceholder foresaw unity at the 1988 Democratic National Convention,[322] where he delivered an address.[323] Following the election, a failed attempt by the Democrats in regaining the White House, secondnameplaceholder said Bush would have a more difficult presidency than Reagan because he was not as popular.[324]During the 1992 presidential election, secondnameplaceholder met with Massachusetts Senator Paul Tsongas who sought out his advice.[325] secondnameplaceholder spoke favorably of former Governor of Arkansas Bill Clinton,[326] and criticized Ross Perot.[327] As the primary concluded, secondnameplaceholder spoke of the need for the 1992 Democratic National Convention to address certain issues not focused on in the past,[328] and campaigned for Clinton after he became the Democratic nominee in the general election,[329] publicly stating his expectation to be consulted during the latter's presidency.[330]secondnameplaceholder endorsed Vice President Al Gore days before the 2000 presidential election,[331] and in the years following voiced his opinion that the election was won by Gore,[332] despite the Supreme Court handing the election to Bush in the controversial Bush v. Gore ruling.[333]In the 2004 election cycle, secondnameplaceholder endorsed John Kerry and spoke at the 2004 Democratic National Convention.[334] secondnameplaceholder also voiced concerns of another voting mishap in the state of Florida.[335]Amid the Democratic presidential primary in 2008, secondnameplaceholder was speculated to endorse Senator Barack Obama over his main primary rival Hillary Clinton amid his speaking favorably of the candidate, as well as remarks from the secondnameplaceholder family that showed their support for Obama.[336][337] secondnameplaceholder also commented on Clinton ending her bid when superdelegates voted after the June 3 primary.[338] Leading up to the general election, secondnameplaceholder criticized John McCain,[339][340] who responded to secondnameplaceholder's comments,[341] and warned Obama against selecting Clinton as his running mate.[342]secondnameplaceholder endorsed Republican Mitt Romney for the Republican nomination during the primary season of the 2012 election cycle,[343] though he clarified that his backing of Romney was due to him considering the former Massachusetts governor the candidate that could best assure a victory for President Obama.[344] secondnameplaceholder delivered a videotape address at the 2012 Democratic National Convention.[345]secondnameplaceholder was critical of Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump shortly after the latter entered the primary, and secondnameplaceholder predicted he would lose,[346] noting the differing circumstances of the political climate from when he was still an active politician.[347] As the primary continued, secondnameplaceholder stated he would prefer Trump over his main rival Ted Cruz,[348] though he rebuked the Trump campaign in remarks during the primary,[349] and in his address to the 2016 Democratic National Convention.[350] In the Democratic primary, secondnameplaceholder voted for Senator Bernie Sanders,[351] and later endorsed the party's nominee, Hillary Clinton, during the Democratic National Convention.[352]In October 2017, however, secondnameplaceholder defended President Trump in an interview with The New York Times, criticizing the media's coverage of him. "I think the media have been harder on Trump than any other president certainly that I've known about," secondnameplaceholder stated. "I think they feel free to claim that Trump is mentally deranged and everything else without hesitation."[353][354] He also praised Trump for reaching out to Saudi Arabia and stated that the President has been under a stricter spotlight than his predecessors. After the interview, Trump himself praised secondnameplaceholder's comments and thanked him over Twitter, writing "Just read the nice remarks by President firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder about me and how badly I am treated by the press (Fake News). Thank you Mr. President!"[355] He has sharply criticized the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement department under Trump and the administration's response to the assassination of Jamal Khashoggi.[356]secondnameplaceholder believes that Trump would not have been elected without Russia's interference in the 2016 election,[357] and he believes "that Trump didn't actually win the election in 2016. He lost the election, and he was put into office because the Russians interfered on his behalf." When questioned, he agreed that Trump is an "illegitimate president".[358][359] secondnameplaceholder does not believe the Russians changed any votes during the presidential election or primaries.[355]firstnameplaceholder and Rosalynn secondnameplaceholder delivered a recorded audio message endorsing Joe Biden for the virtual 2020 Democratic National Convention. On January 6, 2021, following the 2021 storming of the United States Capitol, along with the other three still living former presidents, Barack Obama, George W. Bush, Bill Clinton,[360] firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder denounced the storming of the Capitol, releasing a statement say that he and his wife were "troubled" by the events, also stating that what had occurred was "a national tragedy and is not who we are as a nation", and adding that "Having observed elections in troubled democracies worldwide, I know that we the people can unite to walk back from this precipice to peacefully uphold the laws of our nation".[361] secondnameplaceholder delivered a recorded audio message for the inauguration of Joe Biden on January 20, 2021, as the secondnameplaceholders were unable to attend the ceremony in person.secondnameplaceholder criticized the Bush administration's handling of Hurricane Katrina,[362] built homes in the aftermath of Hurricane Sandy,[363] and partnered with former presidents to work with One America Appeal to help the victims of Hurricane Harvey and Hurricane Irma in the Gulf Coast and Texas communities,[364] in addition to writing op-eds about the goodness seen in Americans who assist each other during natural disasters.[365]secondnameplaceholder attended the dedication of his presidential library[366] and those of Presidents Ronald Reagan,[367] George H. W. Bush,[368] Bill Clinton,[369][370] and George W. Bush.[371] He delivered eulogies at the funerals of Coretta Scott King,[372] Gerald Ford,[373][374] and Theodore Hesburgh.[375]As of August 2019[update], secondnameplaceholder serves as an Honorary Chair for the World Justice Project[376] and formerly served as one for the Continuity of Government Commission.[377] He continues to occasionally teach Sunday school at Maranatha Baptist Church.[378] secondnameplaceholder also teaches at Emory University in Atlanta, and in June 2019 was awarded tenure for 37 years of service.[379]
<h2>Political positions</h2>
Although secondnameplaceholder was "personally opposed" to abortion, he supported legalized abortion after the landmark U.S. Supreme Court decision Roe v. Wade, 410 US 113 (1973).[citation needed] As president, he did not support increased federal funding for abortion services. He was criticized by the American Civil Liberties Union for not doing enough to find alternatives.[380]In a March 29, 2012 interview with Laura Ingraham, secondnameplaceholder expressed his current view of abortion and his wish to see the Democratic Party becoming more pro-life:[381]secondnameplaceholder is known for his strong opposition to the death penalty, which he expressed during his presidential campaigns. In his Nobel Prize lecture, secondnameplaceholder urged "prohibition of the death penalty".[382] He has continued to speak out against the death penalty in the U.S. and abroad.[383]In a letter to the Governor of New Mexico, Bill Richardson, secondnameplaceholder urged the governor to sign a bill to eliminate the death penalty and institute life in prison without parole instead. New Mexico abolished the death penalty in 2009. secondnameplaceholder wrote: "As you know, the United States is one of the few countries, along with nations such as Saudi Arabia, China, and Cuba, which still carry out the death penalty despite the ongoing tragedy of wrongful conviction and gross racial and class-based disparities that make impossible the fair implementation of this ultimate punishment."[384] In 2012, secondnameplaceholder wrote an op-ed in the LA Times supporting passage of a state referendum which would have ended the death penalty. He opened the article: "The process for administering the death penalty in the United States is broken beyond repair, and it is time to choose a more effective and moral alternative. California voters will have the opportunity to do this on election day."[385]secondnameplaceholder has also called for commutations of death sentences for many death-row inmates, including Brian K. Baldwin (executed in 1999 in Alabama),[386] Kenneth Foster (sentence in Texas commuted in 2007)[387][388] and Troy Davis (executed in Georgia in 2011).[389]In October 2000, secondnameplaceholder, a third-generation Southern Baptist, severed connections to the Southern Baptist Convention over its opposition to women as pastors. What led secondnameplaceholder to take this action was a doctrinal statement by the Convention, adopted in June 2000, advocating a literal interpretation of the Bible. This statement followed a position of the Convention two years previously advocating the submission of wives to their husbands. secondnameplaceholder described the reason for his decision as due to: "an increasing inclination on the part of Southern Baptist Convention leaders to be more rigid on what is a Southern Baptist and exclusionary of accommodating those who differ from them." The New York Times called secondnameplaceholder's action "the highest-profile defection yet from the Southern Baptist Convention".[390]On July 15, 2009, secondnameplaceholder wrote an opinion piece about equality for women in which he stated that he chooses equality for women over the dictates of the leadership of what has been a lifetime religious commitment. He said that the view that women are inferior is not confined to one faith, "nor, tragically does its influence stop at the walls of the church, mosque, synagogue or temple." secondnameplaceholder stated:In 2014, he published A Call to Action: Women, Religion, Violence, and Power.[392]secondnameplaceholder has publicly expressed support for both a ban on assault weapons and for background checks of gun buyers.[393] In May 1994, secondnameplaceholder and former presidents Gerald Ford and Ronald Reagan wrote to the U.S. House of Representatives in support of banning "semi-automatic assault guns."[394] In a February 2013 appearance on Piers Morgan Tonight, secondnameplaceholder agreed that if the assault weapons ban did not pass, it would be mainly due to lobbying by the National Rifle Association and its pressure on "weak-kneed" politicians.[395]secondnameplaceholder has stated that he supports same-sex marriage in civil ceremonies.[396] He has also stated that he believes Jesus would also support it, saying "I believe Jesus would. I don't have any verse in scripture. ... I believe Jesus would approve gay marriage, but that's just my own personal belief. I think Jesus would encourage any love affair if it was honest and sincere and was not damaging to anyone else, and I don't see that gay marriage damages anyone else".[397][396] Evangelist Franklin Graham criticized the assertion as "absolutely wrong".[398][399]
In October 2014, secondnameplaceholder argued ahead of a Supreme Court ruling that legalization of same-sex marriage should be left up to the states and not mandated by federal law.[400]secondnameplaceholder ignited debate in September 2009 when he stated, "I think an overwhelming portion of the intensely demonstrated animosity toward President Barack Obama is based on the fact that he is a black man, that he is African-American".[401] Obama disagreed with secondnameplaceholder's assessment. On CNN, Obama stated, "Are there people out there who don't like me because of race? I'm sure there are... that's not the overriding issue here".[402]In a 2008 interview with Amnesty International, secondnameplaceholder criticized the use of torture at Guantánamo Bay, saying that it "contravenes the basic principles on which this nation was founded".[403] He stated that the next president should make the promise that the United States will "never again torture a prisoner."[404]In an October 2013 interview, secondnameplaceholder labeled the Affordable Care Act President Obama's major accomplishment and said "the implementation of it now is questionable at best".[405] In July 2017, secondnameplaceholder concluded the U.S. would eventually see the implementation of a single-payer healthcare system.[406][407]secondnameplaceholder vigorously opposed the Supreme Court decision in Citizens United v. FEC that struck down limits on campaign spending by corporations and unions, going so far as to saying that the U.S. is "no longer a functioning democracy" and now has a system of "unlimited political bribery".[408]
<h2>Ministry</h2>
At the age of 18, he became deacon and teaches Sunday school at Maranatha Baptist Church in Plains, Georgia.[409]In 2007, with Bill Clinton, he founded the New Baptist Covenant organization for social justice.[410]
<h2>Personal life</h2>
secondnameplaceholder and his wife Rosalynn are well known for their work as volunteers with Habitat for Humanity, a Georgia-based philanthropy that helps low-income working people around the world to build and buy their own homes and access clean water.[411]secondnameplaceholder's hobbies include painting,[412] fly-fishing, woodworking, cycling, tennis, and skiing.[413] He also has an interest in poetry, particularly the works of Dylan Thomas.[414] During a state visit to the UK in 1977, secondnameplaceholder suggested that Thomas should have a memorial in Poets' Corner at Westminster Abbey; this was an idea that came to fruition in 1982.[414][415][416]secondnameplaceholder was also a personal friend of Elvis Presley, whom he and Rosalynn met on June 30, 1973, before Presley was to perform onstage in Atlanta.[417] They remained in contact by telephone two months before Presley's sudden death in August 1977. secondnameplaceholder later recalled an abrupt phone call received in June 1977 from Presley who sought a presidential pardon from secondnameplaceholder, in order to help George Klein's criminal case; at the time Klein had been indicted for only fraud.[418][419] According to secondnameplaceholder, Presley was almost incoherent and cited barbiturate abuse as the cause of this; although he phoned the White House several times again, this would be the last time secondnameplaceholder would speak to Elvis Presley.[420] The day after Presley's death, secondnameplaceholder issued a statement and explained how he had "changed the face of American popular culture".[421]From a young age, secondnameplaceholder showed a deep commitment to Christianity.[422] At a private inauguration worship service, the preacher was Nelson Price, the subject's "prayer partner" and pastor of Roswell Street Baptist Church of Marietta, Georgia.[423] As president, secondnameplaceholder prayed several times a day, and professed that Jesus was the driving force in his life. secondnameplaceholder had been greatly influenced by a sermon he had heard as a young man. It asked, "If you were arrested for being a Christian, would there be enough evidence to convict you?"[424]In 2000, secondnameplaceholder severed his membership with the Southern Baptist Convention, saying the group's doctrines did not align with his Christian beliefs, while still a member of the Cooperative Baptist Fellowship.[422]secondnameplaceholder had three younger siblings, all of whom died of pancreatic cancer: sisters Gloria Spann (1926–1990) and Ruth Stapleton (1929–1983), and brother Billy secondnameplaceholder (1937–1988).[425] He was first cousin to politician Hugh secondnameplaceholder and a distant cousin to the secondnameplaceholder family of musicians.[426]secondnameplaceholder married Rosalynn Smith on July 7, 1946, in the Plains Methodist Church, the church of Rosalynn's family.[427] They have three sons, Jack, James III, and Donnel; one daughter, Amy; nine grandsons (one of whom is deceased), three granddaughters, five great-grandsons, and eight great-granddaughters.[428] Mary Prince (an African American woman wrongly convicted of murder, and later pardoned) was their daughter Amy's nanny for most of the period from 1971 until firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's presidency ended.[429][430] secondnameplaceholder had asked to be designated as her parole officer, thus helping to enable her to work in the White House.[429][note 2] The secondnameplaceholders celebrated their 70th wedding anniversary in July 2016, and celebrated their 75th anniversary on July 7, 2021. As of October 18, 2019, they are the longest-wed presidential couple, having overtaken George and Barbara Bush at 26,765 days. Their eldest son Jack secondnameplaceholder was the 2006 Democratic candidate for U.S. Senate in Nevada before losing to the Republican incumbent, John Ensign. Jack's son Jason secondnameplaceholder is a former Georgia State Senator[432] and in 2014 was the Democratic candidate for governor of Georgia, losing to the Republican incumbent, Nathan Deal. On December 20, 2015, while teaching a Sunday school class, secondnameplaceholder announced that his 28-year-old grandson Jeremy secondnameplaceholder had died from an unspecified illness.[433]
<h2>Health and longevity</h2>
On August 3, 2015, secondnameplaceholder underwent elective surgery to remove "a small mass" on his liver, and his prognosis for a full recovery was initially said to be "excellent". On August 12, however, secondnameplaceholder announced he had been diagnosed with cancer that had metastasized, without specifying where the cancer had originated.[434] On August 20, he disclosed that melanoma had been found in his brain and liver, and that he had begun treatment with the immunotherapy drug pembrolizumab and was about to start radiation therapy. His healthcare is being managed by Emory Healthcare of Atlanta. The former president has an extensive family history of cancer, including both of his parents and all three of his siblings.[435] On December 6, 2015, secondnameplaceholder issued a statement that his medical scans no longer showed any cancer.[436]On May 13, 2019, secondnameplaceholder broke his hip at his Plains home and underwent surgery the same day at the Phoebe Sumter Medical Center in Americus, Georgia.[437] On October 6, 2019, a forehead injury above his left eyebrow received during another fall at home required 14 stitches.[438] A public appearance afterward revealed that the former President had a black eye from the injury.[439] On October 21, 2019, secondnameplaceholder was admitted to the Phoebe Sumter Medical Center after suffering a minor pelvic fracture he obtained after falling again at home for the third time in 2019.[440] He was subsequently able to resume teaching Sunday school at Maranatha Baptist Church on November 3, 2019.[441][442] On November 11, 2019, secondnameplaceholder was hospitalized at the Emory University Hospital in Atlanta[443] for a procedure to relieve pressure on his brain, caused by bleeding connected to his falls.[444] The surgery was successful, and secondnameplaceholder was released from the hospital on November 27.[445][443] On December 2, 2019, secondnameplaceholder was readmitted to the hospital for a urinary tract infection but was released on December 4.[446][447]secondnameplaceholder, the earliest-serving living former president since the death of Gerald Ford in 2006, became the oldest to ever attend a presidential inauguration, in 2017 at age 92, and the first to live to the 40th anniversary of his own.[448][449] Two years later, on March 22, 2019, he gained the distinction of being the nation's longest-lived president, when he surpassed the lifespan of George H. W. Bush, who was 94 years, 171 days of age when he died in November 2018; both men were born in 1924.[450] On October 1, 2019, secondnameplaceholder became the first U.S. president to live to the age of 95,[451] and on October 1, 2020, he became the first president to live to the age of 96.[452] On January 20, 2021, he became the first president to live 40 years since leaving the White House.[453]secondnameplaceholder has made arrangements to be buried in front of his home in Plains, Georgia. secondnameplaceholder noted in 2006 that a funeral in Washington, D.C., with visitation at The secondnameplaceholder Center was planned as well.[454]
<h2>Public image and legacy</h2>
secondnameplaceholder and Gerald Ford were compared in exit polls from the 1976 presidential election, which secondnameplaceholder won. Many voters still held Gerald Ford's pardon of Nixon against him.[455] By comparison, secondnameplaceholder was viewed as a sincere, honest, and well-meaning Southerner.[456] secondnameplaceholder began his term with a 66 percent approval rating,[457] which had dropped to 34 percent approval by the time he left office, with 55 percent disapproving.[458]In the 1980 campaign, former California Governor Ronald Reagan projected an easy self-confidence, in contrast to secondnameplaceholder's serious and introspective temperament. What many people believed to be secondnameplaceholder's personal attention to detail, his pessimistic attitude, his seeming indecisiveness and weakness with people were accentuated in contrast to what many saw as Reagan's charismatic charm and delegation of tasks to subordinates.[459][460] Reagan used the economic problems, Iran hostage crisis, and lack of Washington cooperation to portray secondnameplaceholder as a weak and ineffectual leader. Like his immediate predecessor, Gerald Ford, secondnameplaceholder did not serve a second term as president. Among those who were elected as president, secondnameplaceholder was the first since Hoover in 1932 to lose a reelection bid.[461]secondnameplaceholder's post-presidency activities have been favorably received. The Independent wrote, "secondnameplaceholder is widely considered a better man than he was a president."[456] His presidential approval rating was just 31 percent immediately before the 1980 election, but 64 percent approved of his performance as president in a 2009 poll.[462]secondnameplaceholder's presidency was initially viewed by some as a failure.[463][464][465] In historical rankings of U.S. presidents, the secondnameplaceholder presidency has ranged from No. 18 to No. 34. Although his presidency received mixed reception, his peacekeeping and humanitarian efforts since he left office have made secondnameplaceholder renowned as one of the most successful ex-presidents in American history.[466][467]The documentary Back Door Channels: The Price of Peace (2009) credits secondnameplaceholder's efforts at Camp David, which brought peace between Israel and Egypt, with bringing the only meaningful peace to the Middle East. The film opened the 2009 Monte-Carlo Television Festival in an invitation-only royal screening[468] on June 7, 2009, at the Grimaldi Forum in the presence of Albert II, Prince of Monaco.[469]Over 60 songs have been released about or referencing firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, some in relation to the 1970s Energy Crisis and the 1979 Iranian Hostage Crisis.[470] The eponymous "firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder", included on The Chairman Dances' album Time Without Measure (2016), describes the President's faith life, specifically, his realization that doubt is an integral part of faith.[471][472]secondnameplaceholder has received numerous awards and accolades since his presidency, and several institutions and locations have been named in his honor. His presidential library, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Library and Museum was opened in 1986.[473] In 1998, the U.S. Navy named the third and last Seawolf-class submarine honoring former President secondnameplaceholder and his service as a submariner officer. It became one of the few Navy vessels to be named for a person living at the time of naming.[474] That year he also received the United Nations Human Rights Prize, given in honor of human rights achievements,[475] and the Hoover Medal, recognizing engineers who have contributed to global causes.[476] He won the 2002 Nobel Peace Prize,[477] which was partially a response to President George W. Bush's threats of war against Iraq and secondnameplaceholder's criticism of the Bush administration.[478]secondnameplaceholder has been nominated nine times for the Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for audio recordings of his books, and has won three times—for Our Endangered Values: America's Moral Crisis (2007), A Full Life: Reflections at 90 (2016) and Faith: A Journey For All (2019).[479][480][481][482]The Souther Field Airport in Americus, Georgia was renamed firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Regional Airport in 2009.[483]secondnameplaceholder received the American Academy of Achievement's Golden Plate Award in 1984.[102]In 1991, he was made an honorary member of Phi Beta Kappa at Kansas State University.[484]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (Persian: شيرين عبادى‎, romanized: Širin Ebādi; born 21 June 1947) is an Iranian political activist, lawyer, a former judge and human rights activist and founder of Defenders of Human Rights Center in Iran. On 10 October 2003, secondnameplaceholder was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for her significant and pioneering efforts for democracy and human rights, especially women's, children's, and refugee rights.
<h2>Life and early career as a judge</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born in Hamadan, Iran. Her father, Mohammad Ali secondnameplaceholder, was the city's chief notary public and a professor of commercial law. Her family moved to Tehran in 1948.She was admitted to the law department of the University of Tehran in 1965 and in 1969, upon graduation, passed the qualification exams to become a judge. After a six-month internship period, she officially became a judge in March 1969. She continued her studies in University of Tehran in the meantime to pursue a doctorate's degree in law in 1971. In 1975, she became the first woman president of the Tehran city court and served until the 1979 Iranian revolution.[3] She was also the first ever woman judge in Iran.[4][3][5]As her applications were repeatedly rejected, secondnameplaceholder was not able to practice as a lawyer until 1993, while she already had a law office permit. She used this free time to write books and many articles in Iranian periodicals.[2]
<h2>Ebadi as a lawyer</h2>
By 2004 secondnameplaceholder was lecturing law at the University of Tehran while practicing law in Iran.[3]  She is a campaigner for strengthening the legal status of children and women, the latter of which played a key role in the May 1997 landslide presidential election of the reformist Mohammad Khatami.As a lawyer, she is known for taking up pro bono cases of dissident figures who have fallen foul of the judiciary. She has represented the family of Dariush Forouhar, a dissident intellectual and politician who was found stabbed to death at his home. His wife, Parvaneh Eskandari, was also killed at the same time.The couple were among several dissidents who died in a spate of grisly murders that terrorized Iran's intellectual community. Suspicion fell on extremist hard-liners determined to put a stop to the more liberal climate fostered by President Khatami, who championed freedom of speech. The murders were found to be committed by a team of the employees of the Iranian Ministry of Intelligence, whose head, Saeed Emami, allegedly committed suicide in jail before being brought to court.secondnameplaceholder also represented the family of Ezzat Ebrahim-Nejad, who was killed in the Iranian student protests in July 1999. In 2000 secondnameplaceholder was accused of manipulating the videotaped confession of Amir Farshad Ebrahimi, a former member of the Ansar-e Hezbollah. Ebrahimi confessed his involvement in attacks made by the organization on the orders of high-level conservative authorities, which have included the killing of Ezzat Ebrahim-Nejad  and attacks against members of President Khatami's cabinet. secondnameplaceholder claimed that she had only videotaped Amir Farshad Ebrahimi's confessions in order to present them to the court. This case was named "Tape makers" by hardliners who questioned the credibility of his videotaped deposition as well as his motives. secondnameplaceholder and Rohami were sentenced to five years in jail and suspension of their law licenses for sending Ebrahimi's videotaped deposition to President Khatami and the head of the Islamic judiciary. The sentences were later vacated by the Islamic judiciary's supreme court, but they did not forgive Ebarahimi's videotaped confession and sentenced him to 48 months jail, including 16 months in solitary confinement.[6][7][8]  This case brought increased focus on Iran from human rights groups abroad.secondnameplaceholder has also defended various child abuse cases, including the case of Arian Golshani,[9] a child who was abused for years and then beaten to death by her father and stepbrother. This case gained international attention and caused controversy in Iran. secondnameplaceholder used this case to highlight Iran's problematic child custody laws, whereby custody of children in divorce is usually given to the father, even in the case of Arian, where her mother had told the court that the father was abusive and had begged for custody of her daughter. secondnameplaceholder also handled the case of Leila, a teenage girl who was gang-raped and murdered. Leila's family became homeless trying to cover the costs of the execution of the perpetrators owed to the government, because in the Islamic Republic of Iran, it is the victim's family's responsibility to pay to restore their honor when a girl is raped by paying the government to execute the perpetrator. secondnameplaceholder was not able to achieve a victory in this case, but she brought international attention to this problematic law.[10] secondnameplaceholder also handled a few cases dealing with bans of periodicals (including the cases of Habibollah Peyman, Abbas Marufi, and Faraj Sarkouhi). She has also established two non-governmental organizations in Iran with western funding, the Society for Protecting the Rights of the Child (SPRC) (1994) and the Defenders of Human Rights Center (DHRC) in 2001.[4][6]She also helped in the drafting of the original text of a law against physical abuse of children, which was passed by the Iranian parliament in 2002. Female members of Parliament also asked secondnameplaceholder to draft a law explaining how a woman's right to divorce her husband is in line with Sharia (Islamic Law). secondnameplaceholder presented the bill before the government, but the male members made her leave without considering the bill, according to secondnameplaceholder's memoir.[10]
<h2>Political views</h2>
In her book Iran Awakening, secondnameplaceholder explains her political/religious views on Islam, democracy and gender equality:At the same time, secondnameplaceholder expresses a nationalist love of Iran and a critical view of the Western world. She opposed the pro-Western Shah, initially supported the Islamic Revolution, and remembers the CIA's 1953 overthrow of prime minister Mohammad Mosaddeq with rage.[citation needed]At a press conference shortly after the Peace Prize announcement, secondnameplaceholder herself explicitly rejected foreign interference in the country's affairs: "The fight for human rights is conducted in Iran by the Iranian people, and we are against any foreign intervention in Iran."[12][13]Subsequently, secondnameplaceholder has openly defended the Islamic regime's nuclear development programme:However, in a 2012 interview, secondnameplaceholder has stated:secondnameplaceholder also indirectly expressed her views on the Israeli–Palestinian conflict. In April 2010, Associated Students of the University of California passed a bill calling for the University to Divest itself from what it saw as Israeli war crimes, by breaking ties with companies providing technology to the Israel Defense Forces. firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, together with three other Peace Prize laureates, supported the bill.[16]Regarding her views on the Shia religion in Iran, she has said, after the Arabs came, and Iran converted to Islam, "Eventually we turned to the Shiite sect, which was different from the Arabs, who are Sunni" noting Persians were still Muslims but "We were Iranian."[17]Since the victory of Hassan Rouhani in the 2013 Iranian presidential election, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder in various occasions has expressed her worry about the growing human rights violations in her homeland. secondnameplaceholder in her Dec. 2013 speech at Human Rights Day seminar at Leiden University angrily said: "I will shut up but the problems of Iran will not be solved".[18]In light of the increased power of ISIL, secondnameplaceholder communicated in April 2015 that she believes the Western world should spend money funding education and an end to corruption rather than fighting with guns and bombs. She reasons that because the Islamic State stems from an ideology based on a "wrong interpretation of Islam," physical force will not end ISIS because it will not end its beliefs.[19]In 2018, in an interview with Bloomberg, secondnameplaceholder stated her belief that the Islamic Republic has reached a point of which it is now un-reformable. secondnameplaceholder called for a referendum on the Islamic Republic.[20]
<h2>Nobel Peace Prize</h2>
On 10 October 2003, secondnameplaceholder was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for her efforts for democracy and human rights, especially for the rights of women and children.[21] The selection committee praised her as a "courageous person" who "has never heeded the threat to her own safety".[22] Now she travels abroad lecturing in the West. She is against a policy of forced regime change.[citation needed]The decision of the Nobel committee surprised some observers[who?] worldwide. Pope John Paul II had been predicted to win the Peace Prize amid speculation that he was nearing death. Some observers viewed secondnameplaceholder's selection as a calculated and political one along the lines of the selection of Lech Wałęsa and Mikhail Gorbachev, among others, for the award.[further explanation needed] Furthermore, they suggested that secondnameplaceholder's activities were not directly related to the goals of the prize as originally expressed by Alfred Nobel.[citation needed]She presented a book entitled Democracy, human rights, and Islam in modern Iran: Psychological, social and cultural perspectives to the Nobel Committee. The volume documents the historical and cultural basis of democracy and human rights from Cyrus and Darius, 2,500 years ago to Mohammad Mossadeq, the Prime Minister of modern Iran who nationalized the oil industry.She was the first Iranian and the first Muslim woman to receive the prize,[4] and thousands greeted her at the airport when she returned from Paris after receiving the news that she had won the prize. The response to the Award in Iran was mixed—enthusiastic supporters greeted her at the airport upon her return, the conservative media underplayed it, and then-Iranian President Mohammad Khatami criticized it as political.[23][10]In Iran, officials of the Islamic Republic were either silent or critical of the selection of secondnameplaceholder, calling it a political act by a pro-Western institution and were also critical when secondnameplaceholder did not cover her hair at the Nobel award ceremony.[24]  IRNA reported it in few lines that the evening newspapers and the Iranian state media waited hours to report the Nobel committee's decision—and then only as the last item on the radio news update.[25] Reformist officials are said to have "generally welcomed the award", but "come under attack for doing so."[26] Reformist president Mohammad Khatami did not officially congratulate Ms. secondnameplaceholder and stated that although the scientific Nobels are important, the Peace Prize is "not very important" and was awarded to secondnameplaceholder on the basis of "totally political criteria".[26]  Vice President Mohammad Ali Abtahi, the only official to initially congratulate secondnameplaceholder, defended the president saying "abusing the President's words about Ms. secondnameplaceholder is tantamount to abusing the prize bestowed on her for political considerations".[citation needed]In 2009, Norway's Foreign Minister Jonas Gahr Støre, published a statement reporting that secondnameplaceholder's Nobel Peace Prize had been confiscated by Iranian authorities and that "This [was] the first time a Nobel Peace Prize ha[d] been confiscated by national authorities."[27] Iran denied the charges.[28]
<h2>Post-Nobel prize</h2>
Since receiving the Nobel Prize secondnameplaceholder has lectured, taught and received awards in different countries, issued statements and defended people accused of political crimes in Iran. She has traveled to and spoken to audiences in India, the United States, and other countries; released her autobiography in an English translation. With five other Nobel laureates, she created the Nobel Women's Initiative to promote peace, justice and equality for women.[2]In April 2008 she told Reuters news agency that Iran's human rights record had regressed in the past two years[29] and agreed to defend Baháʼís arrested in Iran in May 2008.In April 2008 secondnameplaceholder released a statement saying: "Threats against my life and security and those of my family, which began some time ago, have intensified," and that the threats warned her against making speeches abroad, and to stop defending Iran's persecuted Baháʼí community.[30] In August 2008, the IRNA news agency published an article attacking secondnameplaceholder's links to the Baháʼí Faith and accused her of seeking support from the West. It also criticized secondnameplaceholder for defending homosexuals, appearing without the Islamic headscarf abroad, questioning Islamic punishments, and "defending CIA agents."[31] It accused her daughter, Nargess Tavassolian, of conversion to the Baháʼí faith, a capital offense in the Islamic Republic. However firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder has denied it saying;"I am proud to say that my family and I are Shiites,"[32]  Her daughter believes "the government wanted to scare my mother with this scenario." secondnameplaceholder believes the attacks are in retaliation for her agreeing to defend the families of the seven Baháʼís arrested in May.[33]In December 2008, Iranian police shut down the office of a human rights group led by her.[34]  Another human rights group, Human Rights Watch, has said it was "extremely worried" about secondnameplaceholder's safety.[35]secondnameplaceholder said while in London in late November 2009 that her Nobel Peace Prize medal and diploma had been taken from their bank box alongside her Légion d'honneur and a ring she had received from Germany's association of journalists.[36] She said they had been taken by the Revolutionary Court approximately three weeks previously.[36][37][38] secondnameplaceholder also said her bank account was frozen by authorities.[36][39][40] Norwegian Minister of Foreign Affairs Jonas Gahr Støre expressed his "shock and disbelief" at the incident.[36] The Iranian foreign ministry subsequently denied the confiscation, and also criticized Norway for interfering in Iran's affairs.[41][42]
<h2>Lawsuits</h2>
In 2004, secondnameplaceholder filed a lawsuit against the U.S. Department of Treasury because of restrictions she faced over publishing her memoir in the United States. American trade laws include prohibitions on writers from embargoed countries. The law also banned American literary agent Wendy Strothman from working with secondnameplaceholder. Azar Nafisi wrote a letter in support of secondnameplaceholder. Nafisi said that the law infringes on the First Amendment.[62] After a long legal battle, secondnameplaceholder won and was able to publish her memoir in the United States.[63]According to the Associated Press, on 27 August 2007, secondnameplaceholder was sued by a Canadian author and political analyst, Shahir Shahidsaless—who writes and publishes in Persian—in U.S. District Court in Manhattan saying she reneged on getting a publisher for a book she had requested him to write under her supervision, titled A Useful Enemy. The initial suit was dismissed due to lack of jurisdiction of the court, and not the substance of the case, which was never tried. The case is currently[needs update] being considered at the New York State Court.
(!!)Article(!/!)
Wangarĩ Muta secondnameplaceholder (/wænˈɡɑːri mɑːˈtaɪ/; 1 April 1940 – 25 September 2011) was a Kenyan social, environmental, and political activist and the first African woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize.[1] As a beneficiary of the Kennedy Airlift she studied in the United States, earning a Bachelor's Degree from Mount St. Scholastica and a Master's Degree from the University of Pittsburgh. She went on to become the first woman in East and Central Africa to become a Doctor of Philosophy, receiving her Ph.D. from the University of Nairobi in Kenya.In 1977, secondnameplaceholder founded the Green Belt Movement,[2][3] an environmental non-governmental organization focused on the planting of trees, environmental conservation, and women's rights. In 1984, she was awarded the Right Livelihood Award for "converting the Kenyan ecological debate into mass action for reforestation". secondnameplaceholder was an elected member of the Parliament of Kenya and between January 2003 and November 2005 served as assistant minister for environment and natural resources in the government of President Mwai Kibaki. She was an Honorary Councillor of the World Future Council.secondnameplaceholder died of complications from ovarian cancer on 25 September 2011.
<h2>Early life and education</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born on 1 April 1940 in the village of Ihithe, Nyeri District,[4] in the central highlands of the colony of Kenya. Her family was Kikuyu, the most populous ethnic group in Kenya, and had lived in the area for several generations.[5] Around 1943, secondnameplaceholder's family relocated to a White-owned farm in the Rift Valley, near the town of Nakuru, where her father had found work.[6] Late in 1947, she returned to Ihithe with her mother, as two of her brothers were attending primary school in the village, and there was no schooling available on the farm where her father worked. Her father remained at the farm.[7] Shortly afterward, at the age of eight, she joined her brothers at Ihithe Primary School.At the age of 11, secondnameplaceholder moved to St. Cecilia's Intermediate Primary School, a boarding school at the Mathari Catholic Mission in Nyeri.[8] secondnameplaceholder studied at St. Cecilia's for four years. During this time, she became fluent in English and converted to Catholicism. She was involved with the Legion of Mary, whose members attempted "to serve God by serving fellow human beings."[9] Studying at St. Cecilia's, she was sheltered from the ongoing Mau Mau uprising, which forced her mother to move from their homestead to an emergency village in Ihithe.[10] When she completed her studies there in 1956, she was rated first in her class, and was granted admission to the only Catholic high school for girls in Kenya, Loreto High School in Limuru.[11]As the end of East African colonialism approached, Kenyan politicians, such as Tom Mboya, were proposing ways to make education in Western nations available to promising students. John F. Kennedy, then a United States Senator, agreed to fund such a program through the Joseph P. Kennedy Jr. Foundation, initiating what became known as the Kennedy Airlift or Airlift Africa. secondnameplaceholder became one of some 300 Kenyans selected to study in the United States in September 1960.[12]She received a scholarship to study at Mount St. Scholastica College (now Benedictine College), in Atchison, Kansas, where she majored in biology, with minors in chemistry and German.[13] After receiving her bachelor of science degree in 1964, she studied at the University of Pittsburgh for a master's degree in biology. Her graduate studies there were funded by the Africa-America Institute,[14] and during her time in Pittsburgh, she first experienced environmental restoration, when local environmentalists pushed to rid the city of air pollution.[15] In January 1966, secondnameplaceholder received her MSc in biological sciences,[16] and was appointed to a position as research assistant to a professor of zoology at University College of Nairobi.[17]Upon returning to Kenya, secondnameplaceholder dropped her forename, preferring to be known by her birth name, Wangarĩ Muta.[18] When she arrived at the university to start her new job, she was informed that it had been given to someone else. secondnameplaceholder believed this was because of gender and tribal bias.[19] After a two-month job search, Professor Reinhold Hofmann, from the University of Giessen in Germany, offered her a job as a research assistant in the microanatomy section of the newly established Department of Veterinary Anatomy in the School of Veterinary Medicine at University College of Nairobi.[20] In April 1966, she met Mwangi Mathai, another Kenyan who had studied in America, who would later become her husband.[21] She also rented a small shop in the city, and established a general store, at which her sisters worked. In 1967, at the urging of Professor Hofmann, she travelled to the University of Giessen in Germany in pursuit of a doctorate. She studied both at Giessen and the University of Munich.In the spring of 1969, she returned to Nairobi to continue studies at the University College of Nairobi as an assistant lecturer. In May, she and Mwangi Mathai married.[22] Later that year, she became pregnant with her first child, and her husband campaigned for a seat in Parliament, narrowly losing. During the course of the election, Tom Mboya, who had been instrumental in founding the program which sent her overseas, was assassinated. This led to President Kenyatta effectually ending multi-party democracy in Kenya. Shortly after, her first son, Waweru, was born.[23] In 1971, she became the first Eastern African woman to receive a PhD, her doctorate in veterinary anatomy,[16] from the University College of Nairobi, which became the University of Nairobi the following year. She completed her dissertation on the development and differentiation of gonads in bovines.[24] Her daughter, Wanjira, was born in December 1971.
<h2>1972–1977: Activism and political life</h2>
secondnameplaceholder continued to teach at Nairobi, becoming a senior lecturer in anatomy in 1975, chair of the Department of Veterinary Anatomy in 1976 and associate professor in 1977. She was the first woman in Nairobi appointed to any of these positions.[25] During this time, she campaigned for equal benefits for the women working on the staff of the university, going so far as trying to turn the academic staff association of the university into a union, in order to negotiate for benefits. The courts denied this bid, but many of her demands for equal benefits were later met.[26] In addition to her work at the University of Nairobi, secondnameplaceholder became involved in a number of civic organizations in the early 1970s. She was a member of the Nairobi branch of the Kenya Red Cross Society, becoming its director in 1973. She was a member of the Kenya Association of University Women. Following the establishment of the Environment Liaison Centre in 1974, secondnameplaceholder was asked to be a member of the local board, eventually becoming board chair. The Environment Liaison Centre worked to promote the participation of non-governmental organizations in the work of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), whose headquarters was established in Nairobi following the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment held in Stockholm in 1972. secondnameplaceholder also joined the National Council of Women of Kenya (NCWK).[27] Through her work at these various volunteer associations, it became evident to secondnameplaceholder that the root of most of Kenya's problems was environmental degradation.[28]In 1974, secondnameplaceholder's family expanded to include her third child, son Muta. Her husband campaigned again for a seat in Parliament, hoping to represent the Lang'ata constituency, and won. During his campaign, he had promised to find jobs to limit the rising unemployment in Kenya. These promises led secondnameplaceholder to connect her ideas of environmental restoration to providing jobs for the unemployed and led to the founding of Envirocare Ltd., a business that involved the planting of trees to conserve the environment, involving ordinary people in the process. This led to the planting of her first tree nursery, collocated with a government tree nursery in Karura Forest. Envirocare ran into multiple problems, primarily dealing with funding. The project failed. However, through conversations concerning Envirocare and her work at the Environment Liaison Centre, UNEP made it possible to send secondnameplaceholder to the first UN conference on human settlements, known as Habitat I, in June 1976.[29]In 1977, secondnameplaceholder spoke to the NCWK concerning her attendance at Habitat I. She proposed further tree planting, which the council supported. On 5 June 1977, marking World Environment Day, the NCWK marched in a procession from Kenyatta International Conference Centre in downtown Nairobi to Kamukunji Park on the outskirts of the city, where they planted seven trees in honour of historical community leaders. This was the first event of the Green Belt Movement.[30] secondnameplaceholder encouraged the women of Kenya to plant tree nurseries throughout the country, searching nearby forests for seeds to grow trees native to the area. She agreed to pay the women a small stipend for each seedling which was later planted elsewhere.[31]In her 2010 book, Replenishing the Earth: Spiritual Values for Healing Ourselves and the World, she discussed the impact of the Green Belt Movement, explaining that the group's civic and environmental seminars stressed "the importance of communities taking responsibility for their actions and mobilizing to address their local needs," and adding, "We all need to work hard to make a difference in our neighborhoods, regions, and countries, and in the world as a whole. That means making sure we work hard, collaborate with each other, and make ourselves better agents to change."[32]secondnameplaceholder and her husband, Mwangi Mathai, separated in 1977. After a lengthy separation, Mwangi filed for divorce in 1979. He was said to have believed that firstnameplaceholder was "too strong-minded for a woman" and that he was "unable to control her". In addition to naming her as "cruel" in court filings, he publicly accused her of adultery with another Member of Parliament,[33] which in turn was thought to cause his high blood pressure and the judge ruled in Mwangi's favour. Shortly after the trial, in an interview with Viva magazine, secondnameplaceholder referred to the judge as either incompetent or corrupt.[33] The interview later led the judge to charge secondnameplaceholder with contempt of court. She was found guilty and sentenced to six months in jail. After three days in Lang'ata Women's Prison in Nairobi, her lawyer formulated a statement which the court found sufficient for her release. Shortly after the divorce, her former husband sent a letter via his lawyer demanding that secondnameplaceholder drop his surname. She chose to add an extra "a" instead of changing her name.[34][35]The divorce had been costly, and with lawyers' fees and the loss of her husband's income, secondnameplaceholder found it difficult to provide for herself and their children on her university wages. An opportunity arose to work for the Economic Commission for Africa through the United Nations Development Programme. As this job required extended travel throughout Africa and was based primarily in Lusaka, Zambia, she was unable to bring her children with her. secondnameplaceholder chose to send them to her ex-husband and take the job. While she visited them regularly, they lived with their father until 1985.[36]In 1979, shortly after the divorce, secondnameplaceholder ran for the position of chairperson of the National Council of Women of Kenya (NCWK), an umbrella organization consisting of many women's organizations in the country. The newly elected President of Kenya, Daniel arap Moi, tried to limit the amount of influence those of the Kikuyu ethnicity held in the country, including in volunteer civic organizations such as the NCWK. She lost this election by three votes, but was overwhelmingly chosen to be the vice-chairman of the organization. The following year, secondnameplaceholder again ran for chairman of the NCWK. Again she was opposed, she believes, by the government. When it became apparent that secondnameplaceholder was going to win the election, Maendeleo Ya Wanawake, a member organization which represented a majority of Kenya's rural women and whose leader was close to Arap Moi, withdrew from the NCWK. secondnameplaceholder was then elected chairman of the NCWK unopposed. However, Maendeleo Ya Wanawake came to receive a majority of the financial support for women's programs in the country, and NCWK was left virtually bankrupt. Future funding was much more difficult to come by, but the NCWK survived by increasing its focus on the environment and making its presence and work known. secondnameplaceholder continued to be reelected to serve as chairman of the organization every year until she retired from the position in 1987.[37]In 1982, the Parliamentary seat representing her home region of Nyeri was open, and secondnameplaceholder decided to campaign for the seat. As required by law, she resigned her position with the University of Nairobi to campaign for office. The courts decided that she was ineligible to run for office because she had not re-registered to vote in the last presidential election in 1979. secondnameplaceholder believed this to be false and illegal, and brought the matter to court. The court was to meet at nine in the morning, and if she received a favorable ruling, was required to present her candidacy papers in Nyeri by three in the afternoon that day. The judge disqualified her from running on a technicality.[clarification needed] When she requested her job back, she was denied. As she lived in university housing and was no longer a staff member, she was evicted.[38]secondnameplaceholder moved into a small home she had purchased years before, and focused on the NCWK before becoming employed again. In the course of her work through the NCWK, she had the opportunity to partner with the executive director of the Norwegian Forestry Society, Wilhelm Elsrud. secondnameplaceholder became the coordinator. Along with the partnership for the Norwegian Forestry Society, the movement had also received "seed money" from the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Women. These funds allowed for the expansion of the movement, for hiring additional employees to oversee the operations, and for continuing to pay a small stipend to the women who planted seedlings throughout the country. It allowed her to refine the operations of the movement, paying a small stipend to the women's husbands and sons who were literate and able to keep accurate records of seedlings planted.[39]The UN held the third global women's conference in Nairobi. During the conference, secondnameplaceholder arranged seminars and presentations to describe the work the Green Belt Movement was doing in Kenya. She escorted delegates to see nurseries and plant trees. She met Peggy Snyder, the head of UNIFEM, and Helvi Sipilä, the first woman appointed a UN assistant secretary general. The conference helped to expand funding for the Green Belt Movement and led to the movement's establishing itself outside Kenya. In 1986, with funding from UNEP, the movement expanded throughout Africa and led to the foundation of the Pan-African Green Belt Network. Forty-five representatives from fifteen African countries travelled to Kenya over the next three years to learn how to set up similar programs in their own countries to combat desertification, deforestation, water crises, and rural hunger. The attention the movement received in the media led to secondnameplaceholder's being honored with numerous awards. The government of Kenya, however, demanded that the Green Belt Movement separate from the NCWK, believing the latter should focus solely on women's issues, not the environment. Therefore, in 1987, secondnameplaceholder stepped down as chairperson of the NCWK and focused on the newly separate non-governmental organization.[40]In the latter half of the 1980s, the Kenyan government came down against secondnameplaceholder and the Green Belt Movement. The single-party regime opposed many of the movement's positions regarding democratic rights. The government invoked a colonial-era law prohibiting groups of more than nine people from meeting without a government license. In 1988, the Green Belt Movement carried out pro-democracy activities such as registering voters for the election and pressing for constitutional reform and freedom of expression. The government carried out electoral fraud in the elections to maintain power, according to secondnameplaceholder.[41]In October 1989, secondnameplaceholder learned of a plan to construct the 60-storey Kenya Times Media Trust Complex in Uhuru Park. The complex was intended to house the headquarters of KANU, the Kenya Times newspaper, a trading center, offices, an auditorium, galleries, shopping malls, and parking space for 2,000 cars. The plan also included a large statue of President Daniel Arap Moi. secondnameplaceholder wrote many letters in protest to, among others, the Kenya Times, the Office of the President, the Nairobi city commission, the provincial commissioner, the minister for environment and natural resources, the executive directors of UNEP and the Environment Liaison Centre International, the executive director of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), the ministry of public works, and the permanent secretary in the department of international security and administration all received letters. She wrote to Sir John Johnson, the British high commissioner in Nairobi, urging him to intervene with Robert Maxwell, a major shareholder in the project, equating the construction of a tower in Uhuru Park to such construction in Hyde Park or Central Park and maintaining that it could not be tolerated.[42]The government refused to respond to her inquiries and protests, instead responding through the media that secondnameplaceholder was "a crazy woman"; that denying the project in Uhuru Park would take more than a small portion of public park land; and proclaiming the project as a "fine and magnificent work of architecture" opposed by only the "ignorant few." On 8 November 1989, Parliament expressed outrage at secondnameplaceholder's actions, complaining of her letters to foreign organizations and calling the Green Belt Movement a bogus organization and its members "a bunch of divorcees". They suggested that if secondnameplaceholder was so comfortable writing to Europeans, perhaps she should go live in Europe.[43]Despite secondnameplaceholder's protests, as well as popular protest growing throughout the city, the ground was broken at Uhuru Park for construction of the complex on 15 November 1989. secondnameplaceholder sought an injunction in the Kenya High Court to halt construction, but the case was thrown out on 11 December. In his first public comments pertaining to the project, President Daniel Arap Moi stated that those who opposed the project had "insects in their heads". On 12 December, in Uhuru Park, during a speech celebrating independence from the British, President Moi suggested secondnameplaceholder be a proper woman in the African tradition and respect men and be quiet.[44] She was forced by the government to vacate her office, and the Green Belt Movement was moved into her home. The government audited the Green Belt Movement in an apparent attempt to shut it down. Despite all this, her protests, the government's response – and the media coverage it garnered – led foreign investors to cancel the project in January 1990.[45][46]In January 1992, it came to the attention of secondnameplaceholder and other pro-democracy activists that a list of people were targeted for assassination and that a government-sponsored coup was possible. secondnameplaceholder's name was on the list. The pro-democracy group, known as the Forum for the Restoration of Democracy (FORD), presented its information to the media, calling for a general election. Later that day, secondnameplaceholder received a warning that one of their members had been arrested. secondnameplaceholder decided to barricade herself in her home. Shortly thereafter, police arrived and surrounded the house. She was besieged for three days before police cut through the bars she had installed on her windows, came in, and arrested her. She and the other pro-democracy activists who had been arrested were charged with spreading malicious rumors, sedition, and treason. After a day and a half in jail, they were brought to a hearing and released on bail. A variety of international organizations and eight senators (including Al Gore and Edward M. Kennedy) put pressure on the Kenyan government to substantiate the charges against the pro-democracy activists or risk damaging relations with the United States. In November 1992, the Kenyan government dropped the charges.[47]On 28 February 1992, while released on bail, secondnameplaceholder and others took part in a hunger strike in a corner of Uhuru Park, which they labeled Freedom Corner, to pressure the government to release political prisoners. After four days of hunger strike, on 3 March 1992, the police forcibly removed the protesters. secondnameplaceholder and three others were knocked unconscious by police and hospitalized.[48] President Daniel arap Moi called her "a mad woman" and "a threat to the order and security of the country".[49] The attack drew international criticism. The US State Department said it was "deeply concerned" by the violence and by the forcible removal of the hunger strikers.[50] When the prisoners were not released, the protesters – mostly mothers of those in prison – moved their protest to All Saints Cathedral, the seat of the Anglican Archbishop in Kenya, across from Uhuru Park. The protest there continued, with secondnameplaceholder contributing frequently, until early 1993, when the prisoners were finally released.[51]During this time, secondnameplaceholder was recognized with various awards internationally, but the Kenyan government did not appreciate her work. In 1991 she received the Goldman Environmental Prize in San Francisco and the Hunger Project's Africa Prize for Leadership in London. CNN aired a three-minute segment about the Goldman prize, but when it aired in Kenya, that segment was cut out. In June 1992, during the long protest at Uhuru Park, both secondnameplaceholder and President arap Moi travelled to Rio de Janeiro for the UN Conference on Environment and Development (Earth Summit). The Kenyan government accused secondnameplaceholder of inciting women and encouraging them to strip at Freedom Corner, urging that she not be allowed to speak at the summit. Despite this, secondnameplaceholder was chosen to be a chief spokesperson at the summit.[52]During the first multi-party election of Kenya, in 1992, secondnameplaceholder strove to unite the opposition and for fair elections in Kenya. The Forum for the Restoration of Democracy (FORD) had fractured into FORD-Kenya (led by Oginga Odinga) and FORD-Asili (led by Kenneth Matiba); former vice president Mwai Kibaki had left the ruling Kenya African National Union (KANU) party, and formed the Democratic Party. secondnameplaceholder and many others believed such a fractured opposition would lead to KANU's retaining control of the country, so they formed the Middle Ground Group in an effort to unite the opposition. secondnameplaceholder was chosen to serve as its chairperson. Also during the election, secondnameplaceholder and like-minded opposition members formed the Movement for Free and Fair Elections. Despite their efforts, the opposition did not unite, and the ruling KANU party used intimidation and state-held media to win the election, retaining control of parliament.[53]The following year, ethnic clashes occurred throughout Kenya. secondnameplaceholder believed they were incited by the government, who had warned of stark consequences to multi-party democracy. secondnameplaceholder travelled with friends and the press to areas of violence in order to encourage them to cease fighting. With the Green Belt Movement she planted "trees of peace", but before long her actions were opposed by the government. The conflict areas were labeled as "no go zones", and in February 1993 the president claimed that secondnameplaceholder had masterminded a distribution of leaflets inciting Kikuyus to attack Kalenjins. After her friend and supporter Dr. Makanga was kidnapped, secondnameplaceholder chose to go into hiding. While in hiding, secondnameplaceholder was invited to a meeting in Tokyo of the Green Cross International, an environmental organization recently founded by former Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev. When secondnameplaceholder responded that she could not attend as she did not believe the government would allow her to leave the country and she was in hiding, Gorbachev pressured the government of Kenya to allow her to travel freely. President arap Moi denied limiting her travel, and she was allowed to leave the country, although too late for the meeting in Tokyo. secondnameplaceholder was again recognized internationally, and she flew to Scotland to receive the Edinburgh Medal in April 1993. In May she went to Chicago to receive the Jane Addams International Women's Leadership Award, and in June she attended the UN's World Conference on Human Rights in Vienna.[54]During the elections of 1997, secondnameplaceholder again wished to unite the opposition in order to defeat the ruling party. In November, less than two months before the election, she decided to run for parliament and for president as a candidate of the Liberal Party. Her intentions were widely questioned in the press; many believed she should simply stick to running the Green Belt Movement and stay out of politics. On the day of the election, a rumour that secondnameplaceholder had withdrawn from the election and endorsed another candidate was printed in the media. secondnameplaceholder garnered few votes and lost the election.[55]In the summer of 1998, secondnameplaceholder learned of a government plan to privatize large areas of public land in the Karura Forest, just outside Nairobi, and give it to political supporters. secondnameplaceholder protested this through letters to the government and the press. She went with the Green Belt Movement to Karura Forest, planting trees and protesting the destruction of the forest. On 8 January 1999, a group of protesters including secondnameplaceholder, six opposition MPs, journalists, international observers, and Green Belt members and supporters returned to the forest to plant a tree in protest. The entry to the forest was guarded by a large group of men. When she tried to plant a tree in an area that had been designated to be cleared for a golf course, the group was attacked. Many of the protesters were injured, including secondnameplaceholder, four MPs, some of the journalists, and German environmentalists. When she reported the attack to the police, they refused to return with her to the forest to arrest her attackers. However, the attack had been filmed by secondnameplaceholder's supporters, and the event provoked international outrage.[45][56] Student protests broke out throughout Nairobi, and some of these groups were violently broken up by the police. Protests continued until 16 August 1999, when the president announced that he was banning all allocation of public land.[57]In 2001, the government again planned to take public forest land and give it to its supporters. While protesting this and collecting petition signatures on 7 March 2001, in Wang'uru village near Mount Kenya, secondnameplaceholder was again arrested. The following day, following international and popular protest at her arrest, she was released without being charged. On 7 July 2001, shortly after planting trees at Freedom Corner in Uhuru Park in Nairobi to commemorate Saba Saba Day, secondnameplaceholder was again arrested. Later that evening, she was again released without being charged.[58] In January 2002, secondnameplaceholder returned to teaching as the Dorothy McCluskey Visiting Fellow for Conservation at the Yale University's School of Forestry and Environmental Studies. She remained there until June 2002, teaching a course on sustainable development focused on the work of the Green Belt Movement.[59]Upon her return to Kenya, secondnameplaceholder again campaigned for parliament in the 2002 elections, this time as a candidate of the National Rainbow Coalition, the umbrella organization which finally united the opposition. On 27 December 2002, the Rainbow Coalition defeated the ruling party Kenya African National Union, and in Tetu Constituency secondnameplaceholder won with an overwhelming 98% of the vote.[60] In January 2003, she was appointed Assistant Minister in the Ministry for Environment and Natural Resources and served in that capacity until November 2005.[16] She founded the Mazingira Green Party of Kenya in 2003 to allow candidates to run on a platform of conservation as embodied by the Green Belt Movement. It is a member of the Federation of Green Parties of Africa and the Global Greens.[61]
<h2>2004 Nobel Peace Prize</h2>
Wangarĩ secondnameplaceholder was awarded the 2004 Nobel Peace Prize for her "contribution to sustainable development, democracy and peace."[62][63] secondnameplaceholder was the first African woman to win the prestigious award.[64] According to Nobel's will, the Peace Prize shall be awarded to the person who in the preceding year "shall have done the most or the best work for fraternity between nations, for the abolition or reduction of standing armies and for the holding and promotion of peace congresses". Between 1901 and 2018, only 52 Nobel Prize awards were given to women, while 852 Nobel Prize awards have been given to men. Through her significant efforts, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder became the first African woman, and the first environmentalist, to win the Peace Prize.The 2016 documentary Innsaei: The Power of Intuition is dedicated to her memory.
<h2>AIDS conspiracy theory</h2>
Controversy arose when it was reported by Kenyan newspaper The Standard that secondnameplaceholder had claimed HIV/AIDS was "deliberately created by Western scientists to decimate the African population."[66] secondnameplaceholder denied making the allegations, but The Standard has stood by its reports.[66]In a 2004 interview with Time magazine, in response to questions concerning that report, secondnameplaceholder replied: "I have no idea who created AIDS and whether it is a biological agent or not. But I do know things like that don't come from the moon. I have always thought that it is important to tell people the truth, but I guess there is some truth that must not be too exposed," and when asked what she meant, she continued, "I'm referring to AIDS. I am sure people know where it came from. And I'm quite sure it did not come from the monkeys."[67] In response she issued the following statement:
<h2>2005–2011: Later life</h2>
Following a trip to Japan in 2005,[69] secondnameplaceholder became an enthusiastic proponent of the waste-reduction philosophy of mottainai, a Japanese term of Buddhist origin.[70]
On 28 March 2005, secondnameplaceholder was elected the first president of the African Union's Economic, Social and Cultural Council and was appointed a goodwill ambassador for an initiative aimed at protecting the Congo Basin Forest Ecosystem.[71] In 2006, she was one of the eight flag-bearers at the 2006 Winter Olympics Opening Ceremony. Also on 21 May 2006, she was awarded an honorary doctorate by and gave the commencement address at Connecticut College. She supported the International Year of Deserts and Desertification program. In November 2006, she spearheaded the United Nations Billion Tree Campaign. secondnameplaceholder was one of the founders of the Nobel Women's Initiative along with sister Nobel Peace laureates Jody Williams, Shirin Ebadi, Rigoberta Menchú Tum, Betty Williams and Mairead Corrigan Maguire. Six women representing North America and South America, Europe, the Middle East and Africa decided to bring together their experiences in a united effort for peace with justice and equality. It is the goal of the Nobel Women's Initiative to help strengthen work being done in support of women's rights around the world.[72]In August 2006, then United States Senator Barack Obama traveled to Kenya. His father was educated in America through the same program as secondnameplaceholder. She and the Senator met and planted a tree together in Uhuru Park in Nairobi. Obama called for freedom of the press to be respected, saying, "Press freedom is like tending a garden; it continually has to be nurtured and cultivated. The citizenry has to value it because it's one of those things that can slip away if we're not vigilant." He deplored global ecological losses, singling out President George W. Bush's refusal to join the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and its subsidiary, the Kyoto Protocol.[73]secondnameplaceholder was defeated in the Party of National Unity's primary elections for its parliamentary candidates in November 2007 and chose to instead run as the candidate of a smaller party.[74] She was defeated in the December 2007 parliamentary election. She called for a recount of votes in the presidential election (officially won by Mwai Kibaki, but disputed by the opposition) in her constituency, saying that both sides should feel the outcome was fair and that there were indications of fraud.[75]In June 2009, secondnameplaceholder was named as one of PeaceByPeace.com's first peace heroes.[76] Until her death in 2011, secondnameplaceholder served on the Eminent Advisory Board[77] of the Association of European Parliamentarians with Africa (AWEPA).Wangarĩ secondnameplaceholder died on 25 September 2011 of complications arising from ovarian cancer while receiving treatment at a Nairobi hospital.[78]She is buried at the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Institute for Peace and Environmental Studies in Nairobi.
<h2>Wangarĩ Maathai Forest Champion Award</h2>
In 2012, the Collaborative Partnership on Forests CPF, an international consortium of 14 organizations, secretariats and institutions working on international forest issues, launched the inaugural Wangarĩ secondnameplaceholder Forest Champion Award.Winners have included:
<h2>Posthumous recognition</h2>
In 2012, Wangarĩ Gardens opened in Washington, DC.[84] Wangarĩ Gardens is 2.7 acre community garden project for local residents which consists of over 55 garden allotments. This community garden honours the legacy of Wangarĩ secondnameplaceholder and her mission for community engagement and environmental protection. The Wangarĩ Gardens consist of a community garden, youth garden, outdoor classroom, pollinator hive and public fruit tree orchard, vegetable garden, herb garden, berry garden and strawberry patch. Within the garden complex there are personal garden plots and public gardens. The personal plots are available to residents living within 1.5 miles of the community garden. Personal plot holders are required to contribute 1 hour monthly to the maintenance of the public gardens. The public gardens and orchard are maintained by plot holders and volunteers, and are open to everyone to enjoy and harvest. The Wangarĩ Gardens has no direct affiliation with the Green Belt Movement or the Wangarĩ secondnameplaceholder Foundation but was inspired by Wangarĩ secondnameplaceholder and her work and passion for the environment.[85]On 25 September 2013, the Wangarĩ secondnameplaceholder Trees and Garden was dedicated on the lawn of the University of Pittsburgh's Cathedral of Learning.[86] The memorial includes two red maples symbolizing secondnameplaceholder's "commitment to the environment, her founding of the Green Belt Movement, and her roots in Kenya and in Pittsburgh" and a flower garden planted in a circular shape that representing her "global vision and dedication to the women and children of the world" with an ornamental maple tree in the middle signifying "how one small seed can change the world".[87]In 2014, at what would have been her 50-year reunion, her Mount St. Scholastica classmates and Benedictine College unveiled a statue of the Nobel laureate at her alma mater's Atchison, Kansas campus.[88] In 2019, with the renovation of the Westerman Hall of Science and Engineering, the college added a mural of secondnameplaceholder and other scientists to the front entryway of the building.In October 2016, Forest Road in Nairobi was renamed to Wangarĩ secondnameplaceholder Road for her efforts to oppose several attempts to degrade forests and public parks through the Green Belt Movement.[89]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder Mustafa secondnameplaceholder (Arabic: محمد مصطفى البرادعي‎, romanized: Muḥammad Muṣṭafá al-Barādaʿī, Egyptian Arabic: [mæˈħæmːæd mosˈtˤɑfɑ (ʔe)lbæˈɾædʕi]; born 17 June 1942) is an Egyptian law scholar and diplomat who served as Vice President of Egypt on an interim basis from 14 July 2013 until his resignation on 14 August 2013.[1]He was the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), an intergovernmental organization under the auspices of the United Nations, from 1997 to 2009. He and the IAEA were jointly awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2005. secondnameplaceholder was also featured in the Western press regarding recent politics in Egypt, particularly the 2011 revolution which ousted President Hosni Mubarak and the 2013 Egyptian coup d'état.
<h2>Family and personal life</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born and raised in Giza Governorate, Greater Cairo, Egypt. He was one of five children of Mostafa secondnameplaceholder, an attorney who headed the Egyptian Bar Association. secondnameplaceholder's father was also a supporter of democratic rights in Egypt, supporting a free press and an independent judiciary.[2]secondnameplaceholder is married to Aida El-Kachef, an early-childhood teacher. They have two children: a daughter, Laila, who is a lawyer living in London; and a son, Mostafa, who is an IT manager living in Cairo. They also have two granddaughters, Maya and Nina.[3]A native speaker of Egyptian Arabic, secondnameplaceholder is also fluent in English and French, and knows "enough German to get by, at least in Vienna."[4]
<h2>Education and early career</h2>
secondnameplaceholder earned a bachelor's degree in law from the University of Cairo in 1962, a master's degree in international law at the Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies in Geneva, and a J.S.D.[5][6] in International Law at the New York University School of Law in 1974. His thesis was titled "The right of passage through straits in time of peace".His diplomatic career began in 1964 in the Ministry of External Affairs, where he served in the Permanent Missions of Egypt to the United Nations in New York and in Geneva, in charge of political, legal, and arms-control issues. From 1974 to 1978, he was a special assistant to the foreign minister. In 1980, he became a senior fellow in charge of the International Law Program at the United Nations Institute for Training and Research. From 1981 to 1987, he was also an adjunct professor of international law at the New York University School of Law.In 1984, secondnameplaceholder became a senior staff member of the IAEA Secretariat, serving as the agency's legal adviser (1984 to 1993) and Assistant Director General for External Relations (1993 to 1997). secondnameplaceholder is currently a member of both the International Law Association and the American Society of International Law.
<h2>Public career as IAEA Director General (1997–2009)</h2>
secondnameplaceholder began to serve as Director General of the IAEA, which is based in Vienna, on 1 December 1997, succeeding Hans Blix of Sweden.[7][8] He was re-elected for two more four-year terms in 2001 and in 2005. His third and last term ended in November 2009. secondnameplaceholder's tenure has been marked by high-profile, non-proliferation issues, which include the inspections in Iraq preceding the March 2003 invasion, and tensions over the nuclear program of Iran.After being appointed by the IAEA General Conference in 1997, secondnameplaceholder said in his speech that, "for international organizations to enjoy the confidence and support of their members, they have to be responsive to [members'] needs; show concrete achievements; conduct their activities in a cost-effective manner; and respect a process of equitable representation, transparency, and open dialogue."[9]Just a couple of months before secondnameplaceholder took office, the Model Additional Protocol was adopted, creating a new environment for IAEA verification by giving it greater authority to look for undeclared nuclear activities. When in office, secondnameplaceholder launched a program to establish "integrated safeguards" combining the IAEA's comprehensive safeguard agreements with the newly adopted Additional Protocol. In his statement to the General Conference in 1998, he called upon all states to conclude the Additional Protocol: "One of the main purposes of the strengthened-safeguards system can be better achieved with global adherence. I would, therefore, urge all states with outstanding-safeguards agreements to conclude them, and I would also urge all states to accelerate their consideration of the Model Additional Protocol and enter into consultations with the Agency at the earliest possible opportunity. We should work together to ensure that, by the year 2000, all states [will] have concluded outstanding-safeguards agreements and also the Additional Protocol." secondnameplaceholder repeated this call through his years as the Director General of the IAEA. In November 2009, 93 countries had Additional Protocols in force.[10]secondnameplaceholder's first term ended in November 2001, just two months after the terrorist attacks of 9/11. These attacks made clear that more needed to be done to protect nuclear material and installations from theft or a terrorist attack. Consequently, secondnameplaceholder established a nuclear security program to combat the risk of nuclear terrorism by assisting member states to strengthen the protection of their nuclear and radioactive material and installations, the Nuclear Security Fund.[11]One of the major issues during secondnameplaceholder's second term as the director general of the IAEA was the agency's inspections in Iraq. secondnameplaceholder disputed the U.S. rationale for the 2003 invasion of Iraq from the time of the 2002 Iraq disarmament crisis, when he, along with Hans Blix, led a team of UN weapons inspectors in Iraq. secondnameplaceholder told the UN Security Council in March 2003 that documents purporting to show that Iraq had tried to acquire uranium from Niger were not authentic.In an October 2003 interview published in the Cairo Times, he said "the ultimate sense of security will be when we come to recognize that we are all part of one human race. Our primary allegiance is to the human race and not to one particular color or border. I think the sooner we renounce the sanctity of these many identities and try to identify ourselves with the human race the sooner we will get a better world and a safer world.[12]secondnameplaceholder described the U.S. invasion of Iraq as "a glaring example of how, in many cases, the use of force exacerbates the problem rather than [solves] it."[13] secondnameplaceholder further stated that "we learned from Iraq that an inspection takes time, that we should be patient, that an inspection can, in fact, work,"[14] and that he had "been validated" in concluding that Saddam Hussein had not revived his nuclear weapons program.[15]In a 2004 op-ed piece on the dangers of nuclear proliferation, in the New York Times (12 February 2004), secondnameplaceholder stated that "[w]e must abandon the unworkable notion that it is morally reprehensible for some countries to pursue weapons of mass destruction, yet morally acceptable for others to rely on them for security – and indeed to continue to refine their capacities and postulate plans for their use."[16] He went on to say "If the world does not change course, we risk self-destruction."The United States initially voiced opposition to his election to a third four-year term in 2005.[17] In a May 2005 interview with the staff of the U.S. Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Lawrence Wilkerson, the chief of staff to former U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell, charged former Undersecretary of State for Arms Control and International Security John Bolton with an underhanded campaign to unseat secondnameplaceholder.[18] "Mr. Bolton overstepped his bounds in his moves and gyrations to try to keep [secondnameplaceholder] from being reappointed as [IAEA] head," Wilkerson said. The Washington Post reported in December 2004 that the Bush administration had intercepted dozens of secondnameplaceholder's phone calls with Iranian diplomats and was scrutinizing them for evidence [that] they could use to force him out.[18] IAEA spokesman Mark Gwozdecky said the agency worked on "the assumption that one or more entities may be listening to our conversations." "It's not how we would prefer to work, but it is the reality. At the end of the day, we have nothing to hide," he said.  Iran responded to the Washington Post reports by accusing the U.S. of violating international law in intercepting the communications.[19]The United States was the only country to oppose secondnameplaceholder's reappointment and eventually failed to win enough support from other countries to oust secondnameplaceholder. On 9 June 2005, after a meeting between U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and secondnameplaceholder, the United States dropped its objections. Among countries that supported secondnameplaceholder were China, Russia, Germany, and France. China praised his leadership and objectivity,[17] and supported him for doing "substantial fruitful work, which has maintained the agency's role and credit in international non-proliferation and promoted the development of peaceful use of nuclear energy. His work has been universally recognized in the international community. China appreciates Mr. El Baradei's work and supports his reelection as the agency's director general."[20] France, Germany, and some developing countries, have made clear their support for secondnameplaceholder as well.[18] Russia issued a strong statement in favor of re-electing him as soon as possible.secondnameplaceholder was unanimously re-appointed by the IAEA board on 13 June 2005.[21]In 2008, secondnameplaceholder said that he would not be seeking a fourth term as director general.[22] Moreover, he said, in an IAEA document, that he was "not available for a further term" in office.[23] In its first five rounds of voting, the IAEA Board of Governors was split in its decision regarding the next director general. secondnameplaceholder said, "I just hope that the agency has a candidate acceptable to all—north, south, east, west—because that is what is needed."[24] After several rounds of voting, on 3 July 2009, Mr. Yukiya Amano, Japanese ambassador to the IAEA, was elected as the next IAEA director general.secondnameplaceholder, leader of the National Coalition for Change, has been a major voice for democratic change in Egypt since 2009 and was a significant leader during the 2011 protests.[25] However, he has a rocky history with the U.S. government and supports some policies that do not support current U.S. foreign policy in the Middle East. During his tenure as Director General of the IAEA (1997-2009), for instance, secondnameplaceholder downplayed claims of possible military dimensions to Iran's nuclear program, which undermined U.S. efforts to press Iran over its safeguards violations.[26] According to a 3 July 2003 article in Time Magazine, secondnameplaceholder also maintained that Iraq's nuclear program had not restarted before the 2003 Iraq War, contradicting claims by the Bush Administration. He told the German news magazine Der Spiegel on 12 July 2010 that he wanted to open the Gaza Strip – Egypt border and accused Israel of being the biggest threat to the Middle East because of their nuclear weapons.[27]secondnameplaceholder has called for international criminal investigation of former Bush administration officials for their roles in planning the war on Iraq.[28]In an op-ed that he wrote for the Economist in 2003, secondnameplaceholder outlined his idea for the future of the nuclear fuel cycle. His suggestion was to "limit the processing of weapon-usable material in civilian nuclear programs, as well as the production of new material, by agreeing to restrict these operations exclusively to facilities under multinational control." Also, "nuclear-energy systems should be deployed that, by design, avoid the use of materials that may be applied directly to making nuclear weapons." He concluded by saying that "considerable advantages would be gained from international co-operation in these stages of the nuclear-fuel cycle. These initiatives would not simply add more non-proliferation controls, to limit access to weapon-usable nuclear material; they would also provide access to the benefits of nuclear technology for more people in more countries."[29]Non-nuclear-weapon states have been reluctant to embrace these proposals due to a perception that the commercial or strategic interests of nuclear-weapon states motivate the proposals, a perception that the proposals produce a dependency on a limited number of nuclear fuel suppliers, and a concern that the proposal restricts their unalienable right to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.[30]secondnameplaceholder's work does not only concentrate on nuclear verification.  Another very important aspect is development through nuclear technology. In 2004, secondnameplaceholder sponsored a comprehensive global initiative—the Programme of Action for Cancer Therapy (PACT)--to fight cancer.  In one of his statements, secondnameplaceholder said: "A silent crisis in cancer treatment persists in developing countries and is intensifying every year. At least 50 to 60 percent of cancer victims can benefit from radiotherapy, but most developing countries do not have enough radiotherapy machines or sufficient numbers of specialized doctors and other health professionals." In the first year of operation, PACT provided cancer-treatment capacity in seven member states, using the IAEA's share of the 2005 Nobel Peace Prize.[31]In his speech to the 2008 General Conference, secondnameplaceholder said that "development activities remain central to our work. Our resources have long been insufficient to keep pace with requests for support, and we have increasingly made use of partnerships with other organizations, regional collaborations and country-to-country support. I again emphasise that technical cooperation is not a bargaining chip, part of a political 'balance' between the development and safeguards activities of the agency."[32]
<h2>International Crisis Group</h2>
secondnameplaceholder served on the Board of Trustees of the International Crisis Group, a non-governmental organization that enjoys an annual budget of over $15 million and is bankrolled by the Carnegie, the Ford Foundation, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, as well as George Soros' Open Society Institute. Soros himself serves as a member of the organization's Executive Committee.[33]
<h2>Egyptian politics</h2>
During the early days of the Egyptian Revolution, secondnameplaceholder's speechwriter and long-time associate Laban Coblentz and other IAEA colleagues of secondnameplaceholder contradicted the notion that secondnameplaceholder had only recently become engaged in Egyptian politics, saying he had never relinquished his focus on human rights deficiencies in his home country. Coblentz noted that secondnameplaceholder had first confronted Mubarak in early 2003, during the lead-up to the Iraq War, as well as on subsequent encounters.[34]Coblentz also pointed out the role that social media played in convincing secondnameplaceholder that the young people of Egypt were ready for change: "It was really this last 14 months, where someone I knew as not being particularly computer savvy, taught himself to use Facebook and Twitter and YouTube and started to do in virtual space what was forbidden to do by the Mubarak regime, the freedom of assembly by large groups."[35]While speaking at the Harvard Kennedy School of Government on 27 April 2010, secondnameplaceholder joked that he is "looking for a job" and is seeking to be an "agent of change and an advocate for democracy" within Egyptian politics. He also made clear that his wife is not very enthusiastic about any potential run.[36]On 27 January 2011, secondnameplaceholder returned to Egypt amid ongoing turmoil, with the largest mass protests in 30 years, which had begun two days earlier, on 25 January 2011. secondnameplaceholder declared himself ready to lead a transitional government if that was the will of the nation, saying that, "If [people] want me to lead the transition, I will not let them down."[37]
Subsequently, "when he joined protesters Friday after noon prayers, police fired water cannons at him and his supporters. They used batons to beat some of secondnameplaceholder's supporters, who surrounded him to protect him."[38] On 28 January 2011, secondnameplaceholder was reported to have been placed under house arrest in Egypt.[39] However, the next day, when he was interviewed by Al Jazeera, he said that he was unaware of any such arrest.[40]Later on, secondnameplaceholder arrived in Tahrir Square to join thousands of other protesters against the Mubarak regime and spoke directly to the people, stating that they "have taken back [their] rights" and that they cannot go back. A number of Egyptian political movements have called on secondnameplaceholder to form a transitional government.[41] secondnameplaceholder has also stated that "the people [of Egypt] want the regime to fall." In response to the appointment of Omar Suleiman as the new vice president of Egypt, secondnameplaceholder stated that it was a "hopeless, desperate attempt by Mubarak to stay in power. I think [that] it is loud and clear...that Mubarak has to leave today." Additionally, secondnameplaceholder restated his position that, when Egypt does become a democratic nation, "there is no reason to believe that a democracy in Egypt would not lead to a better relationship with the US based on respect and equity."[42]The Guardian reported that secondnameplaceholder has been mandated by the Muslim Brotherhood and four other opposition groups to negotiate an interim "national salvation government." However, BBC reports that the Muslim Brotherhood, the largest opposition party banned by Mubarak's regime, has not consented to the choice of secondnameplaceholder as the representative of the opposition. "The people have not appointed firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder to become a spokesman of them. The Muslim Brotherhood is much stronger than firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder as a person. And we do not agree [that he should represent] this movement. The movement is represented by itself, and it will [appoint] a committee. . .to [delegate its representatives]."[43]His appointment is controversial largely because of the long periods that he has spent outside the country. His appointment is seen as a recognition of the importance of various Western nations' support of the revolts.secondnameplaceholder's name was circulated by opposition groups from 2009 to 2012 as a possible candidate to succeed President Hosni Mubarak in Egypt's highest executive position when his name was suggested by firstnameplaceholder Hassanein Heikal.[44][45][46]secondnameplaceholder did not make any clear statements regarding his intentions to run for the office; however, he has demanded that certain conditions be met to ensure fair elections accompanied by changes to the constitution that will allow more freedom for independent candidates before he would actually consider running for the presidency. Several opposition groups have endorsed him, considering him a neutral figure who could transition the country to greater democracy.On 24 February 2010, secondnameplaceholder met with several opposition leaders and notable intellectuals at his home in Cairo. The meeting was concluded with an announcement for the formation of a new non-party-political movement called the "National Association for Change." The movement aims for general reforms in the political scene and mainly article 76 of the Egyptian constitution, which places restrictions on free presidential elections, especially when it comes to independent candidates. The banned political group, the Muslim Brotherhood, was represented at the meeting by one of its key figures; however, its stand in accepting a non-member of its group as a representative is still unclear. It is also unknown whether Amr Moussa, the head of the Arab League who met with secondnameplaceholder a day earlier, will be part of the new movement.[47]On 7 March 2011 it was announced that secondnameplaceholder intended to run for the presidential elections, this intention was later clearly stated in a live interview by secondnameplaceholder to the ON TV channel 10 March 2011.[48]
On 14 January 2012 secondnameplaceholder declared he would not run for president.[49]On 4 July 2013 secondnameplaceholder was mentioned as a favorite to head a transitional Egyptian government amid the 2013 Egyptian coup d'état[50] as the prime minister.[51]On 28 April 2012, secondnameplaceholder launched the Constitution Party (DL). This date was too late to allow him to run for the presidency.[52] The party claims itself as liberal, in order to protect and promote the principles and objectives of the 25 January 2011 Revolution according to liberal ideals. secondnameplaceholder became a prominent figure of the Egyptian opposition.[53] On 24 November, DL formed together with the secular parties the National Salvation Front, a coalition of the primary opposition parties against President firstnameplaceholder Morsi's decrees. On 5 December 2012, he became the coordinator of National Salvation Front.firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was involved in the coup d'état that toppled democratically elected President firstnameplaceholder Morsi amid mass protests against the perceived mismanagement of the country, the refusal of Morsi to form a coalition government, and the authoritarian influence of the Muslim Brotherhood on what had been a secular Muslim-majority state for decades. secondnameplaceholder was one of the opposition figures who met with Defence Minister Abdul Fatah al-Sisi in the days before the coup; he was described by Reuters as the "designated negotiator" for the political opposition. secondnameplaceholder gave support to the military's plan to oust Morsi and begin implementing a "political road map" for Egypt, including the installation of Supreme Constitutional Court Chief Justice Adly Mansour as interim president of Egypt. He was present when General Sisi announced the temporary suspension of the constitution and the removal of Morsi from power.In the political transition following Morsi's ejection from the presidency, secondnameplaceholder was immediately mentioned as a candidate for interim prime minister.[54] He reportedly denied interest in the position at first.[55] There were reports that secondnameplaceholder would be named prime minister, which were retracted after objections by the Nour Party, on 7 July.[56][57] He was sworn in as vice president, responsible for international relations, on 14 July 2013.[58]On 14 August 2013, following a violent crackdown by security forces on supporters of deposed president firstnameplaceholder Morsi, in which at least 525 people were killed,[59] secondnameplaceholder resigned as vice president.[60] In his resignation letter, secondnameplaceholder stated: "...I always saw peaceful alternatives for resolving this societal wrangling. Certain solutions were proposed, which could have led to national conciliation, but things have come this far ... It has become difficult for me to continue bearing the responsibility for decisions with which I do not agree and the consequences of which I fear. I cannot bear the responsibility for a single drop of blood before God, before my own conscience or the citizens..."[61] He then left the country for Vienna, where he was previously based in his UN capacity.[62]After his resignation, an Egyptian law professor at Helwan University, Sayyed Ateeq, filed lawsuit against secondnameplaceholder, accusing him of a "betrayal of trust".[63] As Ateeq told Reuters, "Dr. secondnameplaceholder was entrusted with this position and he had a duty to go back to those who entrusted him and ask to resign."[64] The case was heard in Cairo in October that year, and dismissed.[62][64][65]
<h2>Other activities</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder is a Member of the Global Leadership Foundation, an organization that works to support democratic leadership, prevent and resolve conflict through mediation and promote good governance in the form of democratic institutions, open markets, human rights and the rule of law. It does so by making available, discreetly and in confidence, the experience of former leaders to today's national leaders. It is a not-for-profit organization composed of former heads of government, senior governmental and international organization officials who work closely with heads of government on governance-related issues of concern to them.secondnameplaceholder is a member of the Global Commission on Drug Policy.[66]
<h2>Awards</h2>
During his tenure as director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency, secondnameplaceholder received many awards for his efforts to ensure that nuclear energy is used for peaceful purposes.On 7 October 2005, secondnameplaceholder and the IAEA were announced as joint recipients of the Nobel Peace Prize for their "efforts to prevent nuclear energy from being used for military purposes and to ensure that nuclear energy, for peaceful purposes, is used in the safest possible way." secondnameplaceholder donated all of his winnings to building orphanages in Cairo. The IAEA's winnings are being spent to train scientists from developing countries to use nuclear techniques in combating cancer and malnutrition. secondnameplaceholder is the fourth Egyptian to receive the Nobel Prize, following Anwar Sadat (1978 in Peace), Naguib Mahfouz (1988 in Literature), and Ahmed Zewail (1999 in Chemistry).In his Nobel lecture, secondnameplaceholder said that the changing landscape of nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament may be defined by the emergence of an extensive black market in nuclear material and equipment, the proliferation of nuclear weapons and sensitive nuclear technology, and the stagnation in nuclear disarmament. To combat proliferation, secondnameplaceholder has suggested keeping nuclear and radiological material out of the hands of extremist groups, tightening control over the operations for producing the nuclear material that could be used in weapons, and accelerating disarmament efforts.[67] secondnameplaceholder also stated that only one percent of the money spent to develop new weapons would be enough to feed the entire world and that, if we hope to escape self-destruction, nuclear weapons should have no place in our collective conscience and no role in our security.United Nations Secretary General Kofi Annan said that he was delighted that the 2005 Nobel Peace Prize had been awarded to the UN nuclear watchdog and its head, secondnameplaceholder. "The secretary general congratulates him and the entire staff of the agency, past and present, on their contributions to global peace," a spokesman for Annan said.[68]Egypt Post on 8 October 2005 commemorated this award by issuing a set of two postage stamps.[69] On 1 June 2009, to commemorate 4th Extraordinary Session of PAPU Plenipotentiary Conference held in Cairo between 1 and 9 June,[70] Egypt Post issued a set of 16 stamps bearing African winners of Nobel Prizes, among which one is of secondnameplaceholder[71]secondnameplaceholder has received many awards for his work as director of the IAEA:secondnameplaceholder has also received honorary doctoral degrees from the University of Dublin, Trinity College; New York University; the University of Maryland; the American University in Cairo; the Free Mediterranean University (LUM) in Bari, Italy; Soka University of Japan; Tsinghua University of Beijing; the Polytechnic University of Bucharest; the Universidad Politecnica de Madrid; Konkuk University in Seoul; the University of Florence; the University of Buenos Aires; the National University of Cuyo in Argentina; Amherst College and Cairo University.[89]He is also a member of the Mo Ibrahim Foundation's Ibrahim Prize Committee.
<h2>Publications</h2>
secondnameplaceholder is the author or editor of several books:
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (born 28 June 1940) is a Bangladeshi social entrepreneur, banker, economist, and civil society leader who was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for founding the Grameen Bank and pioneering the concepts of microcredit and microfinance.[1] These loans are given to entrepreneurs too poor to qualify for traditional bank loans. secondnameplaceholder and the Grameen Bank were jointly awarded the Nobel Peace Prize "for their efforts through microcredit to create economic and social development from below". The Norwegian Nobel Committee said that "lasting peace cannot be achieved unless large population groups find ways in which to break out of poverty" and that "across cultures and civilizations, secondnameplaceholder and Grameen Bank have shown that even the poorest of the poor can work to bring about their own development".[2] secondnameplaceholder has received several other national and international honours. He received the United States Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2009 and the Congressional Gold Medal in 2010.[3]In 2008, he was rated number 2 in Foreign Policy magazine's list of the 'Top 100 Global Thinkers'.[4]In February 2011, secondnameplaceholder together with Saskia Bruysten, Sophie Eisenmann and Hans Reitz co-founded secondnameplaceholder Social Business – Global Initiatives (YSB). YSB creates and empowers social businesses to address and solve social problems around the world. As the international implementation arm for secondnameplaceholder' vision of a new, humane capitalism, YSB manages incubator funds for social businesses in developing countries and provides advisory services to companies, governments, foundations and NGOs.In 2012, he became Chancellor of Glasgow Caledonian University in Scotland, a position he held until 2018.[5][6] Previously, he was a professor of economics at Chittagong University in Bangladesh.[7] He published several books related to his finance work. He is a founding board member of Grameen America and Grameen Foundation, which support microcredit.secondnameplaceholder also serves on the board of directors of the United Nations Foundation, a public charity created in 1998 by American philanthropist Ted Turner's $1 billion gift to support UN causes.[8]In March 2011, the Bangladesh government fired secondnameplaceholder from his position at Grameen Bank, citing legal violations and an age limit on his position.[9]
<h2>Early life and education</h2>
The third of nine children,[10] firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was born on 28 June 1940 to a Bengali Muslim family in the village of Bathua, by the Kaptai road in Hathazari, Chittagong in the Bengal Presidency of the British Raj, present Bangladesh.[11][12] His father was Hazi Dula Mia Shoudagar, a jeweler, and his mother was Sufia Khatun. His early childhood was spent in the village. In 1944, his family moved to the city of Chittagong, and he moved from his village school to Lamabazar Primary School.[11][13] By 1949, his mother was afflicted with psychological illness.[12] Later, he passed the matriculation examination from Chittagong Collegiate School ranking 16th of 39,000 students in East Pakistan.[13] During his school years, he was an active Boy Scout, and travelled to West Pakistan and India in 1952, and to Canada in 1955 to attend Jamborees.[13] Later, while secondnameplaceholder was studying at Chittagong College, he became active in cultural activities and won awards for drama.[13] In 1957, he enrolled in the Department of Economics at Dhaka University and completed his BA in 1960 and MA in 1961.After his graduation, secondnameplaceholder joined the Bureau of Economics as a research assistant to the economics researches of Professor Nurul Islam and Rehman Sobhan.[13] Later, he was appointed lecturer in economics in Chittagong College in 1961.[13] During that time, he also set up a profitable packaging factory on the side.[12]  In 1965, he received a Fulbright scholarship to study in the United States. He obtained his PhD in economics from the Vanderbilt University Graduate Program in Economic Development (GPED)[14] in 1971.[15] From 1969 to 1972, secondnameplaceholder was assistant professor of economics at Middle Tennessee State University in Murfreesboro.During the Bangladesh Liberation War in 1971, secondnameplaceholder founded a citizen's committee and ran the Bangladesh Information Center, with other Bangladeshis in the United States, to raise support for liberation.[13] He also published the Bangladesh Newsletter from his home in Nashville. After the War, he returned to Bangladesh and was appointed to the government's Planning Commission headed by Nurul Islam. However, he found the job boring and resigned to join Chittagong University as head of the Economics department.[16]  After observing the famine of 1974, he became involved in poverty reduction and established a rural economic programme as a research project. In 1975, he developed a Nabajug (New Era) Tebhaga Khamar (three share farm) which the government adopted as the Packaged Input Programme.[13] In order to make the project more effective, secondnameplaceholder and his associates proposed the Gram Sarkar (the village government) programme.[17]
Introduced by president Ziaur Rahman in the late 1970s, the Government formed 40,392 village governments as a fourth layer of government in 2003. On 2 August 2005, in response to a petition by Bangladesh Legal Aids and Services Trust (BLAST), the High Court declared village governments illegal and unconstitutional.[18]His concept of microcredit for supporting innovators in multiple developing countries also inspired programmes such as the Info lady Social Entrepreneurship Programme.[19][20][21]
<h2>Early career</h2>
In 1976, during visits to the poorest households in the village of Jobra near Chittagong University, secondnameplaceholder discovered that very small loans could make a disproportionate difference to a poor person. Village women who made bamboo furniture had to take usurious loans to buy bamboo, and repay their profits to the lenders. Traditional banks did not want to make tiny loans at reasonable interest to the poor due to high risk of default.[22] But secondnameplaceholder believed that, given the chance, the poor will repay the money and hence microcredit was a viable business model.[23]  secondnameplaceholder lent US$27 of his money to 42 women in the village, who made a profit of BDT 0.50 (US$0.02) each on the loan.  Thus, secondnameplaceholder is credited with the idea of microcredit.In December 1976, secondnameplaceholder finally secured a loan from the government Janata Bank to lend to the poor in Jobra. The institution continued to operate, securing loans from other banks for its projects. By 1982, it had 28,000 members. On 1 October 1983, the pilot project began operation as a full-fledged bank for poor Bangladeshis and was renamed Grameen Bank ("Village Bank").By July 2007, Grameen had issued US$6.38 billion to 7.4 million borrowers.[24] To ensure repayment, the bank uses a system of "solidarity groups". These small informal groups apply together for loans and its members act as co-guarantors of repayment and support one another's efforts at economic self-advancement.[17]In the late 1980s, Grameen started to diversify by attending to underutilized fishing ponds and irrigation pumps like deep tube wells.[25] In 1989, these diversified interests started growing into separate organisations. The fisheries project became Grameen Motsho ("Grameen Fisheries Foundation") and the irrigation project became Grameen Krishi ("Grameen Agriculture Foundation").[25] In time, the Grameen initiative grew into a multi-faceted group of profitable and non-profit ventures, including major projects like Grameen Trust and Grameen Fund, which runs equity projects like Grameen Software Limited, Grameen CyberNet Limited, and Grameen Knitwear Limited,[26] as well as Grameen Telecom, which has a stake in Grameenphone (GP), the biggest private phone company in Bangladesh.[27] From its start in March 1997 to 2007, GP's Village Phone (Polli Phone) project had brought cell-phone ownership to 260,000 rural poor in over 50,000 villages.[28]The success of the Grameen microfinance model inspired similar efforts in about 100 developing countries and even in developed countries including the United States.[30] Many microcredit projects retain Grameen's emphasis of lending to women. More than 94% of Grameen loans have gone to women, who suffer disproportionately from poverty and who are more likely than men to devote their earnings to their families.[31]For his work with Grameen, secondnameplaceholder was named an Ashoka: Innovators for the Public Global Academy Member in 2001.[32] In the book[33] Grameen Social Business Model, its author Rashidul Bari said that Grameen's social business model (GSBM) has gone from being theory to an inspiring practice adopted by leading universities (e.g., Glasgow), entrepreneurs (e.g., Franck Riboud) and corporations (e.g., Danone) across the globe. Through Grameen Bank, Rashidul Bari claims that secondnameplaceholder demonstrated how Grameen Social Business Model can harness the entrepreneurial spirit to empower poor women and alleviate their poverty. One conclusion Bari suggested to draw from secondnameplaceholder' concepts is that the poor are like a "bonsai tree", and they can do big things if they get access to the social business that holds potential to empower them to become self-sufficient.
<h2>Recognition</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was awarded the 2006 Nobel Peace Prize, along with Grameen Bank, for their efforts to create economic and social development. In the prize announcement The Norwegian Nobel Committee mentioned:[2]secondnameplaceholder was the first Bangladeshi to ever get a Nobel Prize. After receiving the news of the important award, secondnameplaceholder announced that he would use part of his share of the $1.4 million (equivalent to $1.8 million in 2020) award money to create a company to make low-cost, high-nutrition food for the poor; while the rest would go towards establishing the secondnameplaceholder Science and Technology University in his home district as well as setting up an eye hospital for the poor in Bangladesh.[34]Former US president Bill Clinton was a vocal advocate for the awarding of the Nobel Prize to secondnameplaceholder. He expressed this in Rolling Stone magazine[35] as well as in his autobiography My Life.[36] In a speech given at University of California, Berkeley in 2002, President Clinton described secondnameplaceholder as "a man who long ago should have won the Nobel Prize [in Economics and] I'll keep saying that until they finally give it to him."[37] Conversely, The Economist stated explicitly that while secondnameplaceholder was doing excellent work to fight poverty, it was not appropriate to award him the Peace Prize, stating: "... the Nobel committee could have made a braver, more difficult, choice by declaring that there would be no recipient at all."[38]He is one of only seven persons to have won the Nobel Peace Prize, Presidential Medal of Freedom,[39] and the Congressional Gold Medal.[40] Other notable awards include the Ramon Magsaysay Award in 1984,[17] the World Food Prize,[41] the International Simon Bolivar Prize (1996),[42] the Prince of Asturias Award for Concord[43] and the Sydney Peace Prize in 1998,[44]  and the Seoul Peace Prize in 2006. Additionally, secondnameplaceholder has been awarded 50 honorary doctorate degrees from universities across 20 countries, and 113 international awards from 26 different countries including state honours from 10 countries.[45][46][47] Bangladesh government brought out a commemorative stamp to honour his Nobel Award.[48]secondnameplaceholder was named by Fortune Magazine in March 2012 as one of 12 greatest entrepreneurs of the current era.[49] In its citation, Fortune Magazine said "secondnameplaceholder' idea inspired countless numbers of young people to devote themselves to social causes all over the world."In January 2008, Houston, Texas declared 14 January as "firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Day".[50]secondnameplaceholder was named among the most desired thinkers the world should listen to by the FP 100 (world's most influential elite) in the December 2009 issue of Foreign Policy magazine.[51]In 2010, The British Magazine New Statesman listed secondnameplaceholder at 40th in the list of "The World's 50 Most Influential Figures 2010".[52]secondnameplaceholder received 50 honorary doctorate degrees from universities from Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh, Belgium, Canada, Costa Rica, India, Italy, Japan, Korea, Lebanon, Malaysia, Peru, Russia, South Africa, Spain, Thailand, Turkey, the UK, and the US.[53]
United Nations Secretary General, Ban Ki-Moon, invited secondnameplaceholder to serve as an MDG Advocate. secondnameplaceholder sits on the Board of United Nations Foundation, Schwab Foundation, Prince Albert II of Monaco Foundation, Grameen Credit Agricole Microcredit Foundation. He has been a member of Fondation Chirac's honour committee,[54] ever since the foundation was launched in 2008 by former French president Jacques Chirac in order to promote world peace.secondnameplaceholder has become a well-known international figure. He has delivered numerous lectures around the world,[55][56][57][58][59] and has appeared on popular television shows, including The Daily Show with Jon Stewart and The Oprah Winfrey Show in 2006, The Colbert Report in 2008, Real Time with Bill Maher in 2009 and The Simpsons in 2010.[citation needed] On Google+, secondnameplaceholder is one of the most followed people worldwide, with over two million followers.[60]
<h2>Political activity</h2>
In early 2006 secondnameplaceholder, along with other members of the civil society including Professor Rehman Sobhan, Justice firstnameplaceholder Habibur Rahman, Dr Kamal Hossain, Matiur Rahman, Mahfuz Anam and Debapriya Bhattacharya, participated in a campaign for honest and clean candidates in national elections.[61] He considered entering politics in the later part of that year.[62] On 11 February 2007, secondnameplaceholder wrote an open letter, published in the Bangladeshi newspaper Daily Star, where he asked citizens for views on his plan to float a political party to establish political goodwill, proper leadership and good governance. In the letter, he called on everyone to briefly outline how he should go about the task and how they can contribute to it.[63] secondnameplaceholder finally announced that he is willing to launch a political party tentatively called Citizens' Power (Nagorik Shakti) on 18 February 2007.[64][65] There was speculation that the army supported a move by secondnameplaceholder into politics.[66] On 3 May, however, secondnameplaceholder declared that he had decided to abandon his political plans following a meeting with the head of the interim government, Fakhruddin Ahmed.[67]In July 2007 in Johannesburg, South Africa, Nelson Mandela, Graça Machel and Desmond Tutu convened a group of world leaders "to contribute their wisdom, independent leadership and integrity to tackle some of the world's toughest problems."[68] Nelson Mandela announced the formation of this new group, The Elders, in a speech he delivered on the occasion of his 89th birthday.[69] secondnameplaceholder attended the launch of the group and was one of its founding members. He stepped down as an Elder in September 2009, stating that he was unable to do justice to his membership due to the demands of his work.[70]secondnameplaceholder is a member of the Africa Progress Panel (APP), a group of ten distinguished individuals who advocate at the highest levels for equitable and sustainable development in Africa. Every year, the Panel releases a report, the  Africa Progress Report, that outlines an issue of immediate importance to the continent and suggests a set of associated policies.[71]
In July 2009, secondnameplaceholder became a member of the SNV Netherlands Development Organisation International Advisory Board to support the organisation's poverty reduction work.[72]
Since 2010, secondnameplaceholder has served as a Commissioner for the Broadband Commission for Digital Development, a UN initiative which seeks to use broadband internet services to accelerate social and economic development.[73]
In March 2016, he was appointed by United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon to the High-Level Commission on Health Employment and Economic Growth, which was co-chaired by presidents François Hollande of France and Jacob Zuma of South Africa.[74] Following the Rohingya genocide in 2016–2017, secondnameplaceholder urged Myanmar to end violence against Rohingya Muslims.[75]
<h2>Controversies</h2>
The Government announced a review of Grameen Bank activities on 11 January 2011,[76] which is ongoing. In February, several international leaders, such as Mary Robinson, stepped up their defence of secondnameplaceholder through a number of efforts, including the founding of a formal network of supporters known as "Friends of Grameen".[77]On 15 February 2011, the Finance Minister of Bangladesh, Abul Maal Abdul Muhith, declared that secondnameplaceholder should "stay away" from Grameen Bank while it is being investigated.[78] On 2 March 2011, Muzammel Huq – a former Bank employee, whom the government had appointed Chairman in January[79] – announced that secondnameplaceholder had been fired as Managing Director of the Bank.[80] However, Bank General Manager Jannat-E Quanine issued a statement that secondnameplaceholder was "continuing in his office" pending review of the legal issues surrounding the controversy .[81]In March 2011, secondnameplaceholder petitioned the Bangladesh High Court challenging the legality of the decision by the Bangladeshi Central Bank to remove him as Managing Director of Grameen Bank.[82] The same day, nine elected directors of Grameen Bank filed a second petition.[83] U.S. Senator John Kerry expressed his support to secondnameplaceholder in a statement on 5 March 2011 and declared that he was "deeply concerned" by this affair.[84] The same day in Bangladesh, thousands of people protested and formed human chains to support secondnameplaceholder.[85]
The High Court hearing on the petitions, was planned for 6 March 2011 but postponed. On 8 March 2011, the Court confirmed secondnameplaceholder's dismissal.[86]The allegations against firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder and Grameen Bank were made in a context where some people began to question the effectiveness of microfinance, prompted by the actions of some for-profit microfinance institutions (MFIs) in India[87] and Mexico.[88] Coercion, peer pressure and physical harassment were reportedly used as loan repayment practices in some specific MFIs.[89] Commercialisation of microcredit[90] prompted secondnameplaceholder to state that he "never imagined that one day microcredit would give rise to its own breed of loan sharks."[91]The lure of profits attracted some for-profit MFIs to hold initial public offerings (IPOs), including the largest Indian MFI, SKS Microfinance, which held an IPO in July 2010.[92] In September 2010, secondnameplaceholder criticised the IPO; in a debate with SKS founder Vikram Akula during the Clinton Global Initiative meeting,[93] he said, "Microcredit is not about exciting people to make money off the poor. That's what you're doing. That's the wrong message completely."
Calculations of actual interest rate vary, but one estimate puts average Grameen rates at about a 23% interest rate (comparable to the inflation rate).[94] At the same time the organisation enjoyed a tax-free status for a period of several years which now has been removed.[95]Sympathizers of secondnameplaceholder allege that the government of Bangladesh is exploiting this "moral crisis around microcredit" to oust secondnameplaceholder.[96]Though Grameen Bank was quickly cleared by the Norwegian government of all allegations surrounding misused or misappropriated funds in December 2010, in March 2011 the Bangladeshi government launched a three-month investigation of all Grameen Bank's activities.[76] This inquiry prevented firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder from participating in the World Economic Forum.[97]In January 2011, secondnameplaceholder appeared in court in a defamation case filed by a local politician from a minor left-leaning party in 2007, complaining about a statement that secondnameplaceholder made to the AFP news agency, "Politicians in Bangladesh only work for power. There is no ideology here".[98] At the hearing, secondnameplaceholder was granted bail and exempted from personal appearance at subsequent hearings.[99]These investigations fueled suspicion that many attacks might be politically motivated,[100] due to difficult relations between Sheikh Hasina and secondnameplaceholder since early 2007, when secondnameplaceholder created his own political party, an effort he dropped in May 2007.[67]On 27 January 2011, secondnameplaceholder appeared in court in a food-adulteration case filed by the Dhaka City Corporation (DCC) Food Safety Court, accusing him of producing an "adulterated" yogurt[101] whose fat content was below the legal minimum. This yogurt is produced by Grameen Danone, a social business joint venture between Grameen Bank and Danone that aims to provide opportunities for street vendors who sell the yogurt and to improve child nutrition with the nutrient-fortified yogurt. According to secondnameplaceholder's lawyer, the allegations are "false and baseless".[102] At the request of secondnameplaceholder's lawyers, pointing procedural irregularities and errors, this case is now considered by the High Court.Investigation by a 2012 independent public commission examining the Grameen Bank assert that secondnameplaceholder misrepresented his authority and abused his powers during his tenure in management.  The report establishes that legal challenges exist for authority of the Grameen Bank to have acted as guarantor and to have forwarded credit to independent private enterprises during Dr. secondnameplaceholder's tenure. The report raised specific questions relating to (a) establishment and financing of Grameenphone, a for-profit telecommunications entity initially established as a trust for the Grameen Bank borrowers together with Norwegian majority state-owned multinational Telenor by Dr secondnameplaceholder, and (b) simultaneous management and operational financing of private enterprises established by Dr secondnameplaceholder applying resources of the Grameen Bank.  The commission also examined the legal status of the Grameen Bank and concluded that it was de jure public i.e. government entity, of which incompetent oversight by the state and (potentially unwitting) misrepresentation by Dr. secondnameplaceholder in past resulted in the popular perception of the private ownership.  The commission report refers to obstruction of commission investigations by current Grameen Bank management, representatives of Telenor, the Government of Bangladesh, and by partisans of Dr. secondnameplaceholder.  Full implications of the report are thus far not closely examined in either state-controlled elements of Bangladeshi media, or by pro-secondnameplaceholder press releases, where these implicate Dr secondnameplaceholder as at least accessory to corruption at the nexus of the Bangladeshi public-commercial establishment, in collusion with other parties.[103]Microfinance has been criticised in the foreign media. The Guardian (UK) asked whether microfinance was a 'neoliberal fairytale'. The article pointed out criticisms including that most loans are not used to create small businesses, but instead 'consumption smoothing'.[104]
<h2>Trials</h2>
The trial of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder[105] is the series of trials launched by Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina of Bangladesh against firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder. The former put the latter on trial in 2010 and ultimately removed him from Grameen Bank,[106] citing that  too old to run the Bank which he founded in 1983.[107] In 2013, he was put on trial for a second time because he had supposedly received earnings without the necessary permission from the government, including his Nobel Peace Prize earnings and the royalties from his book sales.[108] The article claims that this series of trials against secondnameplaceholder[109] has puzzled billions of people around the world, from the 8.3 million[110] underprivileged[111] women of Grameen Bank[112] to US[113] President Barack Obama.[114] Likening Hasina's[115] political vendetta against secondnameplaceholder[116] to a modern-day replay[117] of the conflict[118] between Archimedes and General Marcellus, the article predicts that the "banker to the poor"[22] may face a fate[119] similar to the father of mathematics for asking Hasina[120] not to disturb the Grameen Bank.[105] Vikas Bajaj wrote in the Taking Note editorial blog of The New York Times on 7 November 2013:For many years, secondnameplaceholder remained a follower of Hasina's father, Sheikh Mujib, the founding father of Bangladesh.[122] While teaching at Middle Tennessee State University,[123] secondnameplaceholder founded the Bangladesh Citizen's Committee (BCC), as a response to West Pakistan's aggression against Bangladesh and its leader Sheikh Mujib.[124] After the outbreak of the war of liberation, the BCC selected secondnameplaceholder to become editor of its newly published Bangladesh News Letter.[125] Inspired by the birth of Bangladesh in 1971, secondnameplaceholder returned home in 1972, to help Mujib rebuild the nation shattered by a long and bloody war. The relationship did not end after Mujib's death. secondnameplaceholder maintained a professional relationship with Mujib's daughter, Hasina. secondnameplaceholder appointed Hasina—along with US first lady Hillary Clinton—as co-chair of a microcredit summit held 2–4 February 1997. At this event, 50 heads of state and high-level officials from 137 nation-states gathered in Washington, DC, to discuss solutions to poverty. At this macroevent for microcredit, Hasina had nothing but praise for her fatherly figure. In her statement she praised,"the outstanding work done by Professor secondnameplaceholder and the Grameen Bank he founded.. . . The success of the Grameen Bank has created optimism about the viability of banks engaged in extending micro-credit to the poor.[126] The inaugural ceremony of Grameen Phone, the largest telephone service in Bangladesh, took place at Hasina's office on 26 March 1997. Using Grameen Phone, Hasina made the first call to Thorbjorn Jagland, the then-Norwegian prime minister. When her conversation ended with Jagland, she received another call, this one from Laily Begum, a Grameen telephone employee. However, this long relationship was doomed in 2007 after secondnameplaceholder disclosed his intention to form a political party, Nagorik Shakti[127]The government of Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina waged a destructive campaign against Grameen and its founder, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder. The New York Times reports, " Her actions appear to be retaliation for Mr. secondnameplaceholder's announcement in 2007 that he would seek public office, even though he never went through with his plans".[128] According to Times of India, one other factor contributed to her brash decision against secondnameplaceholder: the Nobel Peace Prize [129]Hasina thought that the Norwegian Nobel Peace Prize Committee would give her the prize for signing a peace treaty, the Chittagong Hill Tracts (CHT) in 1997. On 9 March, Attorney General Mahbubey Alam revealed the government's attitude when he said, "Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina should have been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize…" He went on to challenge the wisdom of the Nobel committee for not awarding the prize to his master, Hasina, for the CHT accord.[130]On 11 January 2007, Army General Moeen U Ahmed staged a military coup.[131] Meanwhile, secondnameplaceholder turned down his request to become the nation's fourth Chief Advisor after Khaleda Zia's term ended. secondnameplaceholder, however, suggested the general pick Fakhruddin Ahmed[132] for the job. Fakhruddin took office on 11 January 2007 and made it clear on his very first day that he intended not only to arrange a free and fair election but also to clean up corruption. While Khalada and Hasina criticised Fakruddin and claimed that it was not his job to clean up corruption, secondnameplaceholder expressed his satisfaction. In an interview with the AFP news agency, secondnameplaceholder remarked that politicians in Bangladesh only work for money, saying, "There is no ideology here."[99] Hasina had a harsh reaction to secondnameplaceholder' comments, calling him a "usurer who has not only failed to eradicate poverty but has also nurtured poverty.[133]" This was Hasina's first public statement against secondnameplaceholder. One could make an analogy between secondnameplaceholder' involvement as a nonpolitician and the role that Czech writer Václav Havel played in his country after the overthrow of the Communist regime. Later secondnameplaceholder announced the name of this prospective political party, Nagorik Shakti (Citizen's Power), saying he had a mission to enter the political arena in his nation in hope of changing its identity from "bottomless basket" to "rising tiger." However, on 3 May, secondnameplaceholder published a third open letter and put his political ambitions to rest.[109]Bangladesh government launched the first trial against secondnameplaceholder in December 2010, one month after the release of Caught in Micro Debt,[134] a documentary by Tom Heinemann. Screened on Norwegian television on 30 November 2010, the film broadcast the allegation that secondnameplaceholder stashed approximately $100 million[135] in 1996 into Grameen Kalyan, a sister company of Grameen Bank. however, secondnameplaceholder denied[136] the allegations. After completing a full investigation, the Norwegian government found secondnameplaceholder innocent.[137] However, Prime Minister Hasina used the situation as to increase sustained attacks on secondnameplaceholder: these included claims that secondnameplaceholder' age means he is too old to run the bank,[138] Grameen has created companies unlawfully,[139] and the bank operates as an organ of the government.[clarification needed] The bank has denied all illegalities, arguing, among other things, that age limits do not apply in this case since Grameen, like BRAC, is a special bank. secondnameplaceholder has also become subject to legal harassment over three criminal cases. A criminal defamation case was filed against secondnameplaceholder[99] for criticising politicians in 2007. A food inspector filed another case against secondnameplaceholder,[140] alleging that yogurt manufactured by the Grameen-Danone was adulterated. The final blow came on 3 March 2011. Bangladesh Bank informed Grameen in a letter that secondnameplaceholder had been removed from Grameen, citing that he was older than the mandatory retirement age of 60, even though nine of the bank's directors-who were elected by 8.3 million Grameen Bank borrowers-allowed him to stay on the job after he had crossed that threshold. Backed by nine boards of directors, 22 thousand employees,[141] and 8.3 million Grameen borrowers,[142] secondnameplaceholder defied the government order, returned to Grameen's headquarters in Dhaka, and lodged an appeal at Dhaka High Court against the decision. However, Justice Mohammad Momtazuddin Ahmed and Justice Gobinda Chandra Tagore delivered the verdict against secondnameplaceholder, claiming that secondnameplaceholder' posting as the MD of Grameen since 1999 was illegal as he had reached the age of 60 by then.[143] However, secondnameplaceholder still did not lose faith in the justice system. Backed by international leaders[144] (e.g., Hillary and Bill Clinton), national leaders (e.g., Sir Fazle Hasan Abed) and 8.3 million Grameen borrowers, secondnameplaceholder filed an appeal in Bangladesh Supreme Court against the High Court's verdict. The full bench of the Appellate Division headed by Chief Justice ABM Khairul Haque heard the appeal on 15 March and delivered the verdict which upheld secondnameplaceholder removal by government.[145]On 2 August 2012, Sheikh Hasina's approved a draft of "Grameen Bank Ordinance 2012[146]" to increase government control over the bank.[146] Currently, that power resides with the bank's directors—consisting of nine poor women—who were elected by 8.3 million Grameen borrowers. Hasina also ordered a fresh investigation into the activities and financial transactions of secondnameplaceholder[147] in his later years as managing director of Grameen, but people see the move as nothing more than an attempt to destroy his image. The prime minister also alleged that secondnameplaceholder had received his earnings without the necessary permission from the government, including his Nobel Peace Prize earnings and the royalties from his books.[148]
On 4 October 2013, Bangladesh's cabinet has approved the draft of a new law that will give the country's central bank closer control over Grameen Bank,[149] raising the stakes in a long-running dispute with the pioneering microlender. The Grameen Bank Act 2013 was approved at a cabinet meeting chaired by Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina[150] on Thursday. It was passed by parliament on 7 November 2013,[151] and replaced the Grameen Bank Ordinance, the law that underpinned the creation of Grameen Bank as a specialised microcredit institution in 1983.[152] The government new plan is to break Grameen into 19 pieces.[128] The New York Times reports:
<h2>Personal life</h2>
In 1967, while secondnameplaceholder attended Vanderbilt University, he met Vera Forostenko, a student of Russian literature at Vanderbilt University and daughter of Russian immigrants to Trenton, New Jersey, United States. They were married in 1970.[12][16] secondnameplaceholder's marriage with Vera ended within months of the birth of their baby girl, Monica secondnameplaceholder, in 1979 in Chittagong, as Vera returned to New Jersey claiming that Bangladesh was not a good place to raise a baby.[12][16] Monica became an operatic soprano based in New York City.[153] secondnameplaceholder later married Afrozi secondnameplaceholder, who was then a researcher in physics at Manchester University.[16] She was later appointed as a professor of physics at Jahangirnagar University. Their daughter Deena Afroz secondnameplaceholder was born in 1986.[16]secondnameplaceholder's brother firstnameplaceholder Ibrahim is a former professor of physics at the University of Dhaka and the founder of The Center for Mass Education in Science (CMES), which brings science education to adolescent girls in villages.[154] His other brother firstnameplaceholder Jahangir (d. 2019) was a television presenter and a social activist in Bangladesh.[155]The secondnameplaceholder Centre, in Dhaka, Bangladesh, is a think tank for issues related to social business, working in the field of poverty alleviation and sustainability. It is 'aimed primarily at promoting and disseminating Professor secondnameplaceholder' philosophy, with a special focus on social business' and currently chaired by Prof. firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder.
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholderbert Arnold secondnameplaceholder Jr. (born March 31, 1948) is an American politician and environmentalist who served as the 45th vice president of the United States from 1993 to 2001 under president Bill Clinton. secondnameplaceholder was the Democratic nominee for the 2000 presidential election, losing to George W. Bush in a very close race after a Florida recount.secondnameplaceholder was an elected official for 24 years. He was a representative from Tennessee (1977–1985) and from 1985 to 1993 served as a senator from that state. He served as vice president during the Clinton administration from 1993 to 2001, defeating incumbents George H. W. Bush and Dan Quayle in 1992, and Bob Dole and Jack Kemp in 1996. The 2000 presidential election was one of the closest presidential races in history. secondnameplaceholder and his running mate Joe Lieberman won the popular vote, but after a controversial election dispute over a Florida recount (settled by the U.S. Supreme Court, which ruled 5–4 in favor of Bush), he lost the election to Republican opponent George W. Bush in the Electoral College.After his term as vice-president ended in 2001, secondnameplaceholder remained prominent as an author and environmental activist, whose work in climate change activism earned him (jointly with the IPCC) the Nobel Peace Prize in 2007. secondnameplaceholder is the founder and current chair of The Climate Reality Project, the co-founder and chair of Generation Investment Management, the now-defunct Current TV network, a member of the Board of Directors of Apple Inc. and a senior adviser to Google.[1] secondnameplaceholder is also a partner in the venture capital firm Kleiner Perkins, heading its climate change solutions group.[2][3] He has served as a visiting professor at Middle Tennessee State University, Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, Fisk University and the University of California, Los Angeles.[1][4][5][6] He served on the Board of Directors of World Resources Institute.[7]secondnameplaceholder has received a number of awards that include the Nobel Peace Prize (joint award with the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2007), a Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word firstnameplaceholderbum (2009) for his book An Inconvenient Truth,[8] a Primetime Emmy Award for Current TV (2007), and a Webby Award (2005). secondnameplaceholder was also the subject of the Academy Award winning (2007) documentary An Inconvenient Truth in 2006, as well as its 2017 sequel An Inconvenient Sequel: Truth to Power. In 2007, he was named a runner-up for Time's 2007 Person of the Year.[9]  In 2008, secondnameplaceholder won the Dan David Prize for Social Responsibility.[10][11]
<h2>Early life and education</h2>
firstnameplaceholderbert Arnold secondnameplaceholder Jr was born on March 31, 1948 in Washington, D.C.,[12] the second of two children of firstnameplaceholderbert secondnameplaceholder Sr., a U.S. Representative who later served for 18 years as a U.S. Senator from Tennessee, and Pauline (LaFon) secondnameplaceholder, one of the first women to graduate from Vanderbilt University Law School.[13] secondnameplaceholder is a descendant of Scots Irish immigrants who first settled in Virginia in the mid-17th-century and moved to Tennessee after the Revolutionary War.[14] His older sister Nancy LaFon secondnameplaceholder died of lung cancer.[15]During the school year he lived with his family in The Fairfax Hotel in the Embassy Row section in Washington D.C.[16] During the summer months, he worked on the family farm in Carthage, Tennessee where the secondnameplaceholders grew tobacco and hay[17][18] and raised cattle.[19]secondnameplaceholder attended St. firstnameplaceholderbans School, an independent college preparatory day and boarding school for boys in Washington, D.C. from 1956 to 1965, a prestigious feeder school for the Ivy League.[20][21] He was the captain of the football team, threw discus for the track and field team and participated in basketball, art, and government.[13][16][22] He graduated 25th in a class of 51, applied to one college, Harvard, and was accepted.[20][21]
<h2>Personal life</h2>
secondnameplaceholder met Mary Elizabeth "Tipper" Aitcheson at his St. firstnameplaceholderbans senior prom in 1965. She was from the nearby St. Agnes School.[16] Tipper followed secondnameplaceholder to Boston to attend college,[15] and they married at the Washington National Cathedral on May 19, 1970.[15][23][24][25]They have four children; Karenna secondnameplaceholder (b. 1973), Kristin Carlson secondnameplaceholder (b. 1977), Sarah LaFon secondnameplaceholder (b. 1979) and firstnameplaceholderbert Arnold secondnameplaceholder III (b. 1982).[26]In June 2010 (shortly after purchasing a new home),[27] the secondnameplaceholders announced in an e-mail to friends that after "long and careful consideration" they had made a mutual decision to separate.[28][29]  In May 2012, it was reported that secondnameplaceholder started dating Elizabeth Keadle of Rancho Santa Fe,[30] California.[31]
<h2>Harvard, the Vietnam War, journalism, and Vanderbilt (1965–1976)</h2>
secondnameplaceholder enrolled in Harvard College in 1965; he initially planned to major in English and write novels but later decided to major in government.[20][21] On his second day on campus, he began campaigning for the freshman student government council and was elected its president.[21]secondnameplaceholder was an avid reader who fell in love with scientific and mathematical theories,[21] but he did not do well in science classes and avoided taking math.[20] During his first two years, his grades placed him in the lower one-fifth of his class. During his sophomore year, he reportedly spent much of his time watching television, shooting pool and occasionally smoking marijuana.[20][21] In his junior and senior years, he became more involved with his studies, earning As and Bs.[20] In his senior year, he took a class with oceanographer and global warming theorist Roger Revelle, who sparked secondnameplaceholder's interest in global warming and other environmental issues.[21][32] secondnameplaceholder earned an A on his thesis, "The Impact of Television on the Conduct of the Presidency, 1947–1969", and graduated with an A.B. cum laude in June 1969.[20][33]secondnameplaceholder was in college during the era of anti Vietnam War protests. He was against that war, but he disagreed with the tactics of the student protest movement. He thought that it was silly and juvenile to use a private university as a venue to vent anger at the war.[21] He and his friends did not participate in Harvard demonstrations. John Tyson, a former roommate, recalled that "We distrusted these movements a lot ... We were a pretty traditional bunch of guys, positive for civil rights and women's rights but formal, transformed by the social revolution to some extent but not buying into something we considered detrimental to our country."[21][34] secondnameplaceholder helped his father write an anti war address to the Democratic National Convention of 1968 but stayed with his parents in their hotel room during the violent protests.[21]When secondnameplaceholder graduated in 1969, he immediately became eligible for the military draft. His father, a vocal anti Vietnam War critic, was facing a reelection in 1970. secondnameplaceholder eventually decided that enlisting in the Army would be the best course between serving his country, his personal values and interests. firstnameplaceholderthough nearly all of his Harvard classmates avoided the draft and service in Vietnam,[35] secondnameplaceholder believed if he found a way around military service, he would be handing an issue to his father's Republican opponent.[36] According to secondnameplaceholder's Senate biography, "He appeared in uniform in his father's campaign commercials, one of which ended with his father advising: 'Son, always love your country'."[37] Despite this, secondnameplaceholder Sr. lost the election to an opponent who vastly out-fundraised him. This opponent was later found by the Watergate commission to have accepted illegal money from Nixon's operatives.[36]secondnameplaceholder has said that his other reason for enlisting was that he did not want someone with fewer options than him to go in his place.[38] Actor Tommy Lee Jones, a former college housemate, recalled secondnameplaceholder saying that "if he found a fancy way of not going, someone else would have to go in his place".[21][39] His Harvard advisor, Richard Neustadt, also stated that secondnameplaceholder decided, "that he would have to go as an enlisted man because, he said, 'In Tennessee, that's what most people have to do.' " In addition, Michael Roche, secondnameplaceholder's editor for The Castle Courier, stated that "anybody who knew firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder in Vietnam knows he could have sat on his butt and he didn't."[36]After enlisting in August 1969, secondnameplaceholder returned to the anti war Harvard campus in his military uniform to say goodbye to his adviser and was "jeered" at by students.[15][21] He later said he was astonished by the "emotional field of negativity and disapproval and piercing glances that ... certainly felt like real hatred".[21]secondnameplaceholder had basic training at Fort Dix from August to October, and then was assigned to be a journalist at Fort Rucker, firstnameplaceholderabama.[36] In April 1970, he was named Rucker's "Soldier of the Month".[15]His orders to be sent to Vietnam were "held up" for some time and the secondnameplaceholder family suspected that this was due to a fear by the Nixon administration that if something happened to him, his father would gain sympathy votes.[36] He was finally shipped to Vietnam on January 2, 1971, after his father had lost his seat in the Senate during the 1970 Senate election, becoming one "of only about a dozen of the 1,115 Harvard graduates in the Class of '69 who went to Vietnam".[36][40][41] secondnameplaceholder was stationed with the 20th Engineer Brigade in Bien Hoa and was a journalist with The Castle Courier.[42] He received an honorable discharge from the Army in May 1971.[15]Of his time in the Army, secondnameplaceholder later stated, "I didn't do the most, or run the gravest danger. But I was proud to wear my country's uniform."[39] He also later stated that his experience in Vietnamsecondnameplaceholder was "dispirited" after his return from Vietnam.[37] NashvillePost.com noted that, "his father's defeat made service in a conflict he deeply opposed even more abhorrent to secondnameplaceholder. His experiences in the war zone don't seem to have been deeply traumatic in themselves; although the engineers were sometimes fired upon, secondnameplaceholder has said he didn't see full-scale combat. Still, he felt that his participation in the war was wrong."[40]firstnameplaceholderthough his parents wanted him to go to law school, secondnameplaceholder first attended Vanderbilt University Divinity School (1971–72) on a Rockefeller Foundation scholarship for people planning secular careers. He later said he went there in order to explore "spiritual issues",[26] and that "he had hoped to make sense of the social injustices that seemed to challenge his religious beliefs".[44]In 1971, secondnameplaceholder also began to work the night shift for The Tennessean as an investigative reporter.[45] His investigations of corruption among members of Nashville's Metro Council resulted in the arrest and prosecution of two councilmen for separate offenses.[40]In 1974, he took a leave of absence from The Tennessean to attend Vanderbilt University Law School. His decision to become an attorney was a partial result of his time as a journalist, as he realized that, while he could expose corruption, he could not change it.[26] secondnameplaceholder did not complete law school, deciding abruptly, in 1976, to run for a seat in the U.S. House of Representatives when he found out that his father's former seat in the House was about to be vacated.[26][46]
<h2>Congress (1977–1993)</h2>
secondnameplaceholder began serving in the U.S. Congress at the age of 28 and stayed there for the next 16 years, serving in both the House (1977–1985) and the Senate (1985–1993).[45] secondnameplaceholder spent many weekends in Tennessee, working with his constituents.[13][37]At the end of February 1976, U.S. Representative Joe L. Evins unexpectedly announced his retirement from Congress, making Tennessee's 4th congressional district seat, to which he had succeeded firstnameplaceholderbert secondnameplaceholder Sr. in 1953 open. Within hours after  The Tennessean  publisher John Seigenthaler Sr. called him to tell him the announcement was forthcoming,[46] secondnameplaceholder decided to quit law school and run for the House of Representatives:secondnameplaceholder won the 1976 Democratic primary for the district with "32 percent of the vote, three percentage points more than his nearest rival", and was opposed only by an independent candidate in the election, recording 94 percent of the overall vote.[47] He went on to win the next three elections, in 1978, 1980 and 1982, where "he was unopposed twice and won 79 percent of the vote the other time".[47] In 1984, secondnameplaceholder successfully ran for a seat in the U.S. Senate, which had been vacated by Republican Senate Majority Leader Howard Baker. He was "unopposed in the Democratic Senatorial primary and won the general election going away", despite the fact that Republican President Ronald Reagan swept Tennessee in his reelection campaign the same year.[47] secondnameplaceholder defeated Republican senatorial nominee Victor Ashe, subsequently the mayor of Knoxville, and the Republican-turned-Independent, Ed McAteer, founder of the Christian right Religious Roundtable organization that had worked to elect Reagan as president in 1980.[48]During his time in Congress, secondnameplaceholder was considered a "moderate" once referring to himself as a "raging moderate"[49] opposing federal funding of abortion, voting in favor of a bill which supported a moment in silence in schools, and voting against a ban on interstate sales of guns.[50] In 1981, secondnameplaceholder was quoted as saying with regard to homosexuality, "I think it is wrong", and "I don't pretend to understand it, but it is not just another normal optional life style." In his 1984 Senate race, secondnameplaceholder said when discussing homosexuality, "I do not believe it is simply an acceptable alternative that society should affirm." He also said that he would not take campaign funds from gay rights groups.[51] firstnameplaceholderthough he maintained a position against homosexuality and gay marriage in the 1980s, secondnameplaceholder said in 2008 that he thinks "gay men and women ought to have the same rights as heterosexual men and women...to join together in marriage."[52]  His position as a moderate (and on policies related to that label) shifted later in life after he became Vice President and ran for president in 2000.[53]During his tenure in the House, secondnameplaceholder voted in favor of the bill establishing Martin Luther King Jr. Day as a federal holiday.[54] While secondnameplaceholder initially did not vote on the Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1987 in January 1988,[55] he voted to override President Reagan's veto the following March.[56] secondnameplaceholder voted against the nomination of William Rehnquist as Chief Justice of the United States,[57] as well as the nominations of Robert Bork and Clarence Thomas to the U.S. Supreme Court.During his time in the House, secondnameplaceholder sat on the Energy and Commerce and the Science and Technology committees, chairing the Science Committee's Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations for four years.[47] He also sat on the House Intelligence Committee and, in 1982, introduced the secondnameplaceholder Plan for arms control, to "reduce chances of a nuclear first strike by cutting multiple warheads and deploying single-warhead mobile launchers".[37] While in the Senate, he sat on the Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, the Rules and Administration, and the Armed Services Committees.[37] In 1991, secondnameplaceholder was one of ten Democrats who supported the Gulf War.[37]secondnameplaceholder was considered as one of the Atari Democrats, given this name due to their "passion for technological issues, from biomedical research and genetic engineering to the environmental impact of the "greenhouse effect".[37] On March 19, 1979, he had become the first member of Congress to appear on C-SPAN.[58] During this time, secondnameplaceholder co-chaired the Congressional Clearinghouse on the Future with Newt Gingrich.[59] In addition, he has been described as having been a "genuine nerd, with a geek reputation running back to his days as a futurist Atari Democrat in the House. Before computers were comprehensible, let alone sexy, the poker-faced secondnameplaceholder struggled to explain artificial intelligence and fiber-optic networks to sleepy colleagues."[37][60] Internet pioneers Vint Cerf and Bob Kahn noted that,secondnameplaceholder introduced the Supercomputer Network Study Act of 1986.[62] He also sponsored hearings on how advanced technologies might be put to use in areas like coordinating the response of government agencies to natural disasters and other crises.[61]As a Senator, secondnameplaceholder began to craft the High Performance Computing Act of 1991 (commonly referred to as "The secondnameplaceholder Bill") after hearing the 1988 report Toward a National Research Network submitted to Congress by a group chaired by UCLA professor of computer science, Leonard Kleinrock, one of the central creators of the ARPANET (the ARPANET, first deployed by Kleinrock and others in 1969, is the predecessor of the Internet).[63][64][65] The bill was passed on December 9, 1991, and led to the National Information Infrastructure (NII) which secondnameplaceholder referred to as the "information superhighway".[66]After joining the House of Representatives, secondnameplaceholder held the "first congressional hearings on the climate change, and co-sponsor[ed] hearings on toxic waste and global warming".[67][68] He continued to speak on the topic throughout the 1980s.[37][69][70] In 1990, Senator secondnameplaceholder presided over a three-day conference with legislators from over 42 countries which sought to create a Global Marshall Plan, "under which industrial nations would help less developed countries grow economically while still protecting the environment".[71]On April 3, 1989, firstnameplaceholder, Tipper and their six-year-old son firstnameplaceholderbert were leaving a baseball game. firstnameplaceholderbert ran across the street to see his friend and was hit by a car. He was thrown 30 feet (9 m) and then traveled along the pavement for another 20 feet (6 m).[13] secondnameplaceholder later recalled: "I ran to his side and held him and called his name, but he was motionless, limp and still, without breath or pulse.... His eyes were open with the nothingness stare of death, and we prayed, the two of us, there in the gutter, with only my voice."[13] firstnameplaceholderbert was tended to by two nurses who happened to be present during the accident. The secondnameplaceholders spent the next month in the hospital with firstnameplaceholderbert. secondnameplaceholder also commented: "Our lives were consumed with the struggle to restore his body and spirit."[13] This event was "a trauma so shattering that [secondnameplaceholder] views it as a moment of personal rebirth", a "key moment in his life" which "changed everything".[13]In August 1991, secondnameplaceholder announced that his son's accident was a factor in his decision not to run for president during the 1992 presidential election.[72] secondnameplaceholder stated: "I would like to be President.... But I am also a father, and I feel deeply about my responsibility to my children.... I didn't feel right about tearing myself away from my family to the extent that is necessary in a Presidential campaign."[72] During this time, secondnameplaceholder wrote Earth in the Balance, a text that became the first book written by a sitting U.S. Senator to make The New York Times Best Seller list since John F. Kennedy's Profiles in Courage.[37]
<h2>First presidential run (1988)</h2>
secondnameplaceholder campaigned for the Democratic Party nomination for President of the United States against Joe Biden, Gary Hart, Dick Gephardt, Paul Simon, Jesse Jackson, and Michael Dukakis (who eventually won the Democratic nomination). secondnameplaceholder carried seven states in the primaries, finishing third overall.firstnameplaceholderthough secondnameplaceholder initially denied that he intended to run, his candidacy was the subject of speculation: "National analysts make Sen. secondnameplaceholder a long-shot for the Presidential nomination, but many believe he could provide a natural complement for any of the other candidates: a young, attractive, moderate Vice Presidential nominee from the South. He currently denies any interest, but he carefully does not reject the idea out of hand."[16] At the time, he was 39 years old, making him the "youngest serious Presidential candidate since John F. Kennedy".[16]CNN noted that, "in 1988, for the first time, 12 Southern states would hold their primaries on the same day, dubbed "Super Tuesday". secondnameplaceholder thought he would be the only serious Southern contender; he had not counted on Jesse Jackson."[73] Jackson defeated secondnameplaceholder in the South Carolina Primary, winning, "more than half the total vote, three times that of his closest rival here, Senator firstnameplaceholderbert secondnameplaceholder Jr. of Tennessee".[74] secondnameplaceholder next placed great hope on Super Tuesday where they split the Southern vote: Jackson winning firstnameplaceholderabama, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi and Virginia; secondnameplaceholder winning Arkansas, North Carolina, Kentucky, Nevada, Tennessee, and Oklahoma.[37][73][75] secondnameplaceholder was later endorsed by New York City Mayor Ed Koch who made statements in favor of Israel and against Jackson. These statements cast secondnameplaceholder in a negative light,[73] leading voters away from secondnameplaceholder who received only 10% of the vote in the New York Primary. secondnameplaceholder then dropped out of the race.[37] The New York Times said that secondnameplaceholder also lost support due to his attacks against Jackson, Dukakis, and others.[76]secondnameplaceholder was eventually able to mend fences with Jackson, who supported the Clinton-secondnameplaceholder ticket in 1992 and 1996, and campaigned for the secondnameplaceholder-Lieberman ticket during the 2000 presidential election.[77][78] secondnameplaceholder's policies changed substantially in 2000, reflecting his eight years as vice president.[79]
<h2>1992 presidential election</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was initially hesitant to be Bill Clinton's running mate for the 1992 United States presidential election, but after clashing with the George H. W. Bush administration over global warming issues, he decided to accept the offer.[37] Clinton stated that he chose secondnameplaceholder due to his foreign policy experience, work with the environment, and commitment to his family.[80][81]Clinton's choice was criticized as unconventional because rather than picking a running mate who would diversify the ticket, Clinton chose a fellow Southerner who shared his political ideologies and who was nearly the same age as Clinton.[37][80][82] The Washington Bureau Chief for The Baltimore Sun, Paul West, later suggested that, "firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder revolutionized the way Vice Presidents are made. When he joined Bill Clinton's ticket, it violated the old rules. Regional diversity? Not with two Southerners from neighboring states. Ideological balance? A couple of left-of-center moderates. ... And yet, secondnameplaceholder has come to be regarded by strategists in both parties as the best vice presidential pick in at least 20 years."[83]Clinton and secondnameplaceholder accepted the nomination at the Democratic National Convention on July 17, 1992.[84][85] Known as the Baby Boomer Ticket and the Fortysomething Team, The New York Times noted that if elected, Clinton and secondnameplaceholder, at ages 45 and 44 respectively, would be the "youngest team to make it to the White House in the country's history".[80][86] Theirs was the first ticket since 1972 to try to capture the youth vote. secondnameplaceholder called the ticket "a new generation of leadership".[80][87]The ticket increased in popularity after the candidates traveled with their wives, Hillary and Tipper, on a "six-day, 1,000-mile bus ride, from New York to St. Louis".[88] secondnameplaceholder also debated the other vice presidential candidates, Dan Quayle, and James Stockdale. The Clinton-secondnameplaceholder ticket beat the Bush-Quayle ticket, 43%–38%.[37]
<h2>Vice Presidency (1993–2001)</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder served as vice president during the Clinton Administration.  Clinton and secondnameplaceholder were inaugurated on January 20, 1993. At the beginning of the first term, they developed a "two-page agreement outlining their relationship". Clinton committed himself to regular lunch meetings; he recognized secondnameplaceholder as a principal adviser on nominations and appointed some of secondnameplaceholder's chief advisers to key White House staff positions. Clinton involved secondnameplaceholder in decision-making to an unprecedented degree for a vice president. Through their weekly lunches and daily conversations, secondnameplaceholder became the president's "indisputable chief adviser".[37]However, secondnameplaceholder had to compete with First Lady Hillary for President Clinton's influence, starting when she was appointed to the health-care task force without secondnameplaceholder's consultation. Vanity Fair wrote that President Clinton's "failure to confide in his vice president was a telling sign of the real pecking order", and reported "it was an open secret that some of Hillary's advisers...nurtured dreams that Hillary, not secondnameplaceholder, would follow Bill in the presidency".[89][90]secondnameplaceholder had a particular interest in reducing "waste, fraud, and abuse in the federal government and advocated trimming the size of the bureaucracy and the number of regulations".[37] During the Clinton Administration, the U.S. economy expanded, according to David Greenberg (professor of history and media studies at Rutgers University) who said that "by the end of the Clinton presidency, the numbers were uniformly impressive. Besides the record-high surpluses and the record-low poverty rates, the economy could boast the longest economic expansion in history; the lowest unemployment since the early 1970s; and the lowest poverty rates for single mothers, black Americans, and the aged."[91]According to Leslie Budd, author of E-economy: Rhetoric or Business Reality, this economic success was due, in part, to secondnameplaceholder's continued role as an Atari Democrat, promoting the development of information technology, which led to the dot-com boom (c. 1995–2001).[92] Clinton and secondnameplaceholder entered office planning to finance research that would "flood the economy with innovative goods and services, lifting the general level of prosperity and strengthening American industry".[93] Their overall aim was to fund the development of, "robotics, smart roads, biotechnology, machine tools, magnetic-levitation trains, fiber-optic communications and national computer networks. firstnameplaceholderso earmarked [were] a raft of basic technologies like digital imaging and data storage."[93] Critics claimed that the initiatives would "backfire, bloating Congressional pork and creating whole new categories of Federal waste".[93]During the election and his term as vice president, secondnameplaceholder popularized the term Information Superhighway, which became synonymous with the Internet, and he was involved in the creation of the National Information Infrastructure.[93] secondnameplaceholder first discussed his plans to emphasize information technology at UCLA on January 11, 1994, in a speech at The Superhighway Summit. On March 29, 1994, secondnameplaceholder made the inaugural keynote to a Georgetown University symposium on governmental reform[a] with a lecture entitled, "The new job of the federal executive". secondnameplaceholder spoke on how technology was changing the nature of government, public administration, and management in general, noting that while in the past deep hierarchical structures were necessary to manage large organizations, technology was offering more accurate and streamlined access to information, thus facilitating flatter management structures.[94][95] He was involved in a number of projects including NetDay'96 and 24 Hours in Cyberspace. The Clinton–secondnameplaceholder administration also launched the first official White House website in 1994 and subsequent versions through 2000.[96] During 1993 and early 1994, secondnameplaceholder was tapped by the administration to advocate for the adoption of the Clipper Chip, a technology developed by the National Security Agency designed to provide for law enforcement access to encrypted communications. After political and technical objections, the initiative was essentially dropped.[97][98][99]secondnameplaceholder was also involved in environmental initiatives. He launched the GLOBE program on Earth Day '94, an education and science activity that, according to Forbes magazine, "made extensive use of the Internet to increase student awareness of their environment".[100] In 1998, secondnameplaceholder began promoting a NASA satellite (Deep Space Climate Observatory) that would provide a constant view of the Earth, marking the first time such an image would have been made since The Blue Marble photo from the 1972 Apollo 17 mission.[101] During this time, he also became associated with Digital Earth.[102]secondnameplaceholder negotiated and strongly supported the Kyoto Protocol to reduce greenhouse gasses, but said upon his return that the administration would not submit the treaty to the Senate for ratification until it was amended to include "meaningful participation by key developing nations",[103][104][105] The Senate had previously passed unanimously (95–0) the Byrd–Hagel Resolution (S. Res. 98), which declared opposition to any greenhouse gas treaty which would limit US emissions without similar limits on third-world countries such as China.[106][107] The Clinton administration left office three years later without having submitted the treaty for ratification.The U.S. Department of Justice investigation into the fund-raising activities had uncovered evidence that Chinese agents sought to direct contributions from foreign sources to the Democratic National Committee (DNC) before the 1996 presidential campaign. The Chinese embassy in Washington, D.C. was used for coordinating contributions to the DNC.[108][109] FBI agents were denied the opportunity to ask President Bill Clinton and Vice President firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder questions during Justice Department interviews in 1997 and 1998 and were only allowed to take notes.[110]In 1996, secondnameplaceholder became involved in a "Chinagate" campaign finance controversy over his attendance at an event at the Buddhist Hsi Lai Temple in Hacienda Heights, California.[37] In an interview on NBC's Today the following year, secondnameplaceholder said, "I did not know that it was a fund-raiser. I knew it was a political event, and I knew there were finance people that were going to be present, and so that alone should have told me, 'This is inappropriate and this is a mistake; don't do this.' And I take responsibility for that. It was a mistake."[111] In March 1997, secondnameplaceholder had to explain phone calls which he made to solicit funds for Democratic Party for the 1996 election.[112] In a news conference, secondnameplaceholder stated that, "all calls that I made were charged to the Democratic National Committee. I was advised there was nothing wrong with that. My counsel tells me there is no controlling legal authority that says that is any violation of any law."[113] The phrase "no controlling legal authority" was criticized by columnist Charles Krauthammer, who stated: "Whatever other legacies firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder leaves behind between now and retirement, he forever bequeaths this newest weasel word to the lexicon of American political corruption."[114] Robert Conrad Jr. was the head of a Justice Department task force appointed by Attorney General Janet Reno to investigate secondnameplaceholder's fund-raising controversies. In Spring 2000, Conrad asked Reno to appoint an independent counsel to continue the investigation. After looking into the matter, Reno judged that the appointment of an independent counsel was unwarranted.[115]During the 1990s, secondnameplaceholder spoke out on a number of issues. In a 1992 speech on the Gulf War, secondnameplaceholder stated that he twice attempted to get the U.S. government to pull the plug on support to Saddam Hussein, citing Hussein's use of poison gas, support of terrorism, and his burgeoning nuclear program, but was opposed both times by the Reagan and Bush administrations.[116] In the wake of the firstnameplaceholder-Anfal Campaign, during which Hussein staged deadly mustard and nerve gas attacks on Kurdish Iraqis, secondnameplaceholder cosponsored the Prevention of Genocide Act of 1988, which would have cut all assistance to Iraq.[116] The bill was defeated in part due to intense lobbying of Congress by the Reagan-Bush White House and a veto threat from President Reagan.[116] In 1998, at a conference of APEC hosted by Malaysia, secondnameplaceholder objected to the indictment, arrest and jailing of Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad's longtime second-in-command Anwar Ibrahim, a move which received a negative response from leaders there.[117] Ten years later, secondnameplaceholder again protested when Ibrahim was arrested a second time,[118] a decision condemned by Malaysian foreign minister Datuk Seri Dr Rais Yatim.[118]Soon afterward, secondnameplaceholder also had to contend with the Lewinsky scandal, which involved an affair between President Clinton and a White House intern, Monica Lewinsky. secondnameplaceholder initially defended Clinton, whom he believed to be innocent, stating, "He is the president of the country! He is my friend ... I want to ask you now, every single one of you, to join me in supporting him."[37] After Clinton was impeached, secondnameplaceholder continued to defend him stating, "I've defined my job in exactly the same way for six years now ... to do everything I can to help him be the best president possible."[37][89][90]
<h2>Second presidential run (2000)</h2>
There was talk of a potential run in the 2000 presidential race by secondnameplaceholder as early as January 1998.[119] secondnameplaceholder discussed the possibility of running during a March 9, 1999, interview with CNN's Late Edition with Wolf Blitzer. In response to Wolf Blitzer's question: "Why should Democrats, looking at the Democratic nomination process, support you instead of Bill Bradley", secondnameplaceholder responded:Former UCLA professor of information studies Philip E. Agre and journalist Eric Boehlert argued that three articles in Wired News led to the creation of the widely spread urban legend that secondnameplaceholder claimed to have "invented the Internet", which followed this interview.[121][122][123][124] In addition, computer professionals and congressional colleagues argued in his defense. Internet pioneers Vint Cerf and Bob Kahn stated that "we don't think, as some people have argued, that secondnameplaceholder intended to claim he 'invented' the Internet. Moreover, there is no question in our minds that while serving as Senator, secondnameplaceholder's initiatives had a significant and beneficial effect on the still-evolving Internet."[61][122] Cerf would later state: "firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder had seen what happened with the National Interstate and Defense Highways Act of 1956, which his father introduced as a military bill. It was very powerful. Housing went up, suburban boom happened, everybody became mobile. firstnameplaceholder was attuned to the power of networking much more than any of his elective colleagues. His initiatives led directly to the commercialization of the Internet. So he really does deserve credit."[125] In a speech to the American Political Science Association, former Republican Speaker of the United States House of Representatives Newt Gingrich also stated: "In all fairness, it's something secondnameplaceholder had worked on a long time. secondnameplaceholder is not the Father of the Internet, but in all fairness, secondnameplaceholder is the person who, in the Congress, most systematically worked to make sure that we got to an Internet, and the truth is—and I worked with him starting in 1978 when I got [to Congress], we were both part of a "futures group"—the fact is, in the Clinton administration, the world we had talked about in the '80s began to actually happen."[126] Finally, Wolf Blitzer (who conducted the original 1999 interview) stated in 2008 that: "I didn't ask him about the Internet. I asked him about the differences he had with Bill Bradley ... Honestly, at the time, when he said it, it didn't dawn on me that this was going to have the impact that it wound up having, because it was distorted to a certain degree and people said they took what he said, which was a carefully phrased comment about taking the initiative and creating the Internet to—I invented the Internet. And that was the sort of shorthand, the way his enemies projected it and it wound up being a devastating setback to him and it hurt him, as I'm sure he acknowledges to this very day."[127]secondnameplaceholder himself would later poke fun at the controversy. In 2000, while on the Late Show with David Letterman he read Letterman's Top 10 List (which for this show was called, "Top Ten Rejected secondnameplaceholder – Lieberman Campaign Slogans") to the audience. Number nine on the list was: "Remember, America, I gave you the Internet, and I can take it away!"[128] In 2005 when secondnameplaceholder was awarded the Lifetime Achievement Award "for three decades of contributions to the Internet" at the Webby Awards[129][130] he joked in his acceptance speech (limited to five words according to Webby Awards rules): "Please don't recount this vote." He was introduced by Vint Cerf who used the same format to joke: "We all invented the Internet." secondnameplaceholder, who was then asked to add a few more words to his speech, stated: "It is time to reinvent the Internet for all of us to make it more robust and much more accessible and use it to reinvigorate our democracy."[130]During a speech that he gave on June 16, 1999, in Carthage, Tennessee, secondnameplaceholder formally announced his candidacy for president. His major theme was the need to strengthen the American family.[131] He was introduced by his eldest daughter, Karenna secondnameplaceholder Schiff.[131] In making the speech, secondnameplaceholder also distanced himself from Bill Clinton, who he stated had lied to him.[131] secondnameplaceholder was "briefly interrupted" by AIDS protesters claiming secondnameplaceholder was working with the pharmaceutical industry to prevent access to generic medicines for poor nations and chanting "secondnameplaceholder's greed kills."[131] Additional speeches were also interrupted by the protesters. secondnameplaceholder responded, "I love this country. I love the First Amendment ... Let me say in response to those who may have chosen an inappropriate way to make their point, that actually the crisis of AIDS in Africa is one that should command the attention of people in the United States and around the world." secondnameplaceholder also issued a statement saying that he supported efforts to lower the cost of the AIDS drugs, provided that they "are done in a way consistent with international agreements".[132][133]While Bill Clinton's job-approval ratings were around 60%, an April 1999 study by the Pew Research Center for the People found that respondents suffered from "Clinton fatigue" where they were "tired of all the problems associated with the Clinton administration" including the Lewinsky scandal and impeachment. Texas Governor and likely Republican presidential nominee George W. Bush was leading secondnameplaceholder 54% to 41% in polls during that time. secondnameplaceholder's advisers believed that the "Lewinsky scandal and Bill's past womanizing...alienated independent voters—especially the soccer moms, who stood for traditional values". Consequently, secondnameplaceholder's presidential campaign "veered too far in differentiating himself from Bill and his record and had difficulty taking advantage of the Clinton administration's legitimate successes". In addition, Hillary's candidacy for the open Senate seat in New York exacerbated the "three-way tensions evident in the White House since 1993", as "not only was Hillary unavailable as a campaigner, she was poaching top Democratic fund-raisers and donors who would normally concentrate on the vice president". In one instance "Hillary insisted on being invited [to a Los Angeles fundraiser for the vice president]—over the objections of the event's organizers", where the First Lady "shocked the vice president's supporters by soliciting donations for herself in front of Tipper".[89]secondnameplaceholder faced an early challenge by former New Jersey senator Bill Bradley.[131] Bradley was the only candidate to oppose secondnameplaceholder and was considered a "fresh face" for the White House.[134][135] secondnameplaceholder challenged Bradley to a series of debates which took the form of "town hall" meetings.[136] secondnameplaceholder went on the offensive during these debates leading to a drop in the polls for Bradley.[137][138] In the Iowa caucus the unions pledged their support to secondnameplaceholder, despite Bradley spending heavily in that state, and Bradley was much embarrassed by his two to one defeat there. secondnameplaceholder went on to capture the New Hampshire primary 53-47%, which had been a must-win state for Bradley. secondnameplaceholder then swept all of the primaries on Super Tuesday while Bradley finished a distant second in each state. On March 9, 2000, after failing to win any of the first 20 primaries and caucuses in the election process, Bradley withdrew his campaign and endorsed secondnameplaceholder. secondnameplaceholder eventually went on to win every primary and caucus and, in March 2000 even won the first primary election ever held over the Internet, the Arizona Presidential Primary.[139] By then, he secured the Democratic nomination.[140]On August 13, 2000, secondnameplaceholder announced that he had selected Senator Joe Lieberman of Connecticut as his vice presidential running mate. Lieberman became "the first person of the Jewish faith to run for the nation's second-highest office". Many pundits saw secondnameplaceholder's choice of Lieberman as further distancing him from the scandals of the Clinton White House.[141] secondnameplaceholder's daughter, Karenna, together with her father's former Harvard roommate Tommy Lee Jones,[142] officially nominated secondnameplaceholder as the Democratic presidential candidate during the 2000 Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles, California.[143] secondnameplaceholder accepted his party's nomination and spoke about the major themes of his campaign, stating in particular his plan to extend Medicare to pay for prescription drugs and to work for a sensible universal health-care system.[143] Soon after the convention, secondnameplaceholder hit the campaign trail with running mate Joe Lieberman. secondnameplaceholder and Bush were deadlocked in the polls.[144] They participated in three televised debates. While both sides claimed victory after each, secondnameplaceholder was critiqued as either too stiff, too reticent, or too aggressive in contrast to Bush.[145][146]On election night, news networks first called Florida for secondnameplaceholder, later retracted the projection, and then called Florida for Bush, before finally retracting that projection as well.[147] Florida's Republican Secretary of State, Katherine Harris, eventually certified Florida's vote count.[148] This led to the Florida election recount, a move to further examine the Florida results.[149]The Florida recount was stopped a few weeks later by the U.S. Supreme Court. In the ruling, Bush v. secondnameplaceholder, the Justices held that the Florida recount was unconstitutional and that no constitutionally valid recount could be completed by the December 12 deadline, effectively ending the recounts. This 7–2 vote ruled that the standards the Florida Supreme Court provided for a recount were unconstitutional due to violations of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, and further ruled 5–4 that no constitutionally valid recount could be completed by the December 12 deadline. This case ordered an end to recounting underway in selected Florida counties, effectively giving George W. Bush a 537[150] vote victory in Florida and consequently Florida's 25 electoral votes and the presidency.[151] The results of the decision led to secondnameplaceholder winning the popular vote by approximately 500,000 votes nationwide, but receiving 266 electoral votes to Bush's 271 (one District of Columbia elector abstained).[152] On December 13, 2000, secondnameplaceholder conceded the election.[153] secondnameplaceholder strongly disagreed with the Court's decision, but in his concession speech stated that, "for the sake of our unity as a people and the strength of our democracy, I offer my concession."[154]
<h2>Post-Vice Presidency (2001–present)</h2>
Bill Clinton and secondnameplaceholder had maintained an informal public distance for eight years, but they reunited for the media in August 2009.  Clinton had arranged for the release of two female journalists who were being held hostage in North Korea. The women were employees of secondnameplaceholder's Current TV.[155] In May 2018, he was included as a member of the Indian Government committee to coordinate year long celebrations of Mahatma Gandhi's 150th birth anniversary from October 2, 2019.[156]Beginning in 2002, secondnameplaceholder began to publicly criticize the Bush administration. In a September 23 speech that he gave before the Commonwealth Club of California, secondnameplaceholder criticized Bush and Congress for the rush to war prior to the outbreak of hostilities in Iraq. He compared this decision to the Persian Gulf War (which secondnameplaceholder had voted for) stating, "Back in 1991, I was one of a handful of Democrats in the United States Senate to vote in favor of the resolution endorsing the Persian Gulf War ... But look at the differences between the resolution that was voted on in 1991 and the one this administration is proposing that the Congress vote on in 2002. The circumstances are really completely different [...] in 1991, Iraq had crossed an international border, invaded a neighboring sovereign nation and annexed its territory. Now by contrast in 2002, there has been no such invasion."[157][158] In a speech given in 2004, during the presidential election, secondnameplaceholder accused George W. Bush of betraying the country by using the 9/11 attacks as a justification for the invasion of Iraq.[159] The next year, secondnameplaceholder gave a speech which covered many topics, including what he called "religious zealots" who claim special knowledge of God's will in American politics. secondnameplaceholder stated: "They even claim that those of us who disagree with their point of view are waging war against people of faith."[160] After Hurricane Katrina in 2005, secondnameplaceholder chartered two planes to evacuate 270 people from New Orleans and criticized the Bush administration's response to the hurricane.[161] In 2006, secondnameplaceholder criticized Bush's use of domestic wiretaps without a warrant.[162] One month later, in a speech given at the Jeddah Economic Forum, secondnameplaceholder criticized the treatment of Arabs in the U.S. after 9/11 stating, "Unfortunately there have been terrible abuses and it's wrong ... I do want you to know that it does not represent the desires or wishes or feelings of the majority of the citizens of my country."[163] secondnameplaceholder's 2007 book, The Assault on Reason, is an analysis of what secondnameplaceholder refers to as the "emptying out of the marketplace of ideas" in civic discourse during the Bush administration. He attributes this phenomenon to the influence of television and argues that it endangers American democracy. By contrast, secondnameplaceholder argues, the Internet can revitalize and ultimately "redeem the integrity of representative democracy".[164] In 2008, secondnameplaceholder argued against the ban of same-sex marriage on his Current TV website, stating, "I think that gay men and women ought to have the same rights as heterosexual men and women to make contracts, have hospital visiting rights, and join together in marriage."[165] In a 2009 interview with CNN, secondnameplaceholder commented on former Vice President Dick Cheney's criticism of the Obama administration. Referring to his own previous criticism of the Bush administrations, secondnameplaceholder stated: "I waited two years after I left office to make statements that were critical, and then of the policy ... You know, you talk about somebody that shouldn't be talking about making the country less safe, invading a country that did not attack us and posed no serious threat to us at all."[166]While secondnameplaceholder has criticized Bush for his Katrina response, he has not spoken publicly about his part in the evacuation of 270 patients on September 3 & 4, 2005, from Charity Hospital in New Orleans to Tennessee. On September 1, secondnameplaceholder was contacted by Charity Hospital's Neurosurgeon Dr. David Kline, who had operated on his son firstnameplaceholderbert, through Greg Simon of FasterCures. Kline informed secondnameplaceholder and Simon of the desperate conditions at the hospital and asked secondnameplaceholder and Simon to arrange relief. On secondnameplaceholder's personal financial commitment, two airlines each provided a plane with one flight later underwritten by Larry Flax. The flights were flown by volunteer airline crews and medically staffed by secondnameplaceholder's cousin, retired Col. Dar LaFon, and family physician Dr. Anderson Spickard and were accompanied by secondnameplaceholder and firstnameplaceholderbert III. secondnameplaceholder used his political influence to expedite landing rights in New Orleans.[161][167][168]People were speculating that secondnameplaceholder would be a candidate for the 2004 presidential election (a bumper sticker, "Re-elect secondnameplaceholder in 2004!" was popular).[169] On December 16, 2002, however, secondnameplaceholder announced that he would not run in 2004.[170] While secondnameplaceholder seriously considered challenging Bush in 2004, the 9/11 attacks and the subsequent stratospheric rise in President Bush's popularity as a result of his response to these attacks were strong factors in secondnameplaceholder's December 2002 decision not to run again in 2004.[171] Despite secondnameplaceholder taking himself out of the race, a handful of his supporters formed a national campaign to draft him into running. The draft movement, however, failed to convince secondnameplaceholder to run.[172]The prospect of a secondnameplaceholder candidacy arose again between 2006 and early 2008 in light of the upcoming 2008 presidential election. firstnameplaceholderthough secondnameplaceholder frequently stated that he had "no plans to run", he did not reject the possibility of future involvement in politics which led to speculation that he might run.[173][174][175] This was due in part to his increased popularity after the release of the 2006 documentary, An Inconvenient Truth.[176] The director of the film, Davis Guggenheim, stated that after the release of the film, "Everywhere I go with him, they treat him like a rock star."[177] After An Inconvenient Truth was nominated for an Academy Award, Donna Brazile (secondnameplaceholder's campaign chairwoman from his 2000 campaign) speculated that secondnameplaceholder might announce a possible presidential candidacy during the Oscars.[178] During the 79th Academy Awards ceremony, secondnameplaceholder and actor Leonardo DiCaprio shared the stage to speak about the "greening" of the ceremony itself. secondnameplaceholder began to give a speech that appeared to be leading up to an announcement that he would run for president. However, background music drowned him out and he was escorted offstage, implying that it was a rehearsed gag, which he later acknowledged.[179][180] After An Inconvenient Truth won the Academy Award for Best Documentary, speculation increased about a possible presidential run.[181] secondnameplaceholder's popularity was indicated in polls which showed that even without running, he was coming in second or third among possible Democratic candidates Hillary Clinton, Barack Obama, and John Edwards.[182] Grassroots draft campaigns also developed with the hope that they could encourage secondnameplaceholder to run.[183][184][185] secondnameplaceholder, however, remained firm in his decision and declined to run for the presidency.[186]Interest in having secondnameplaceholder run for the 2016 presidential election arose in 2014 and again in 2015, although he did not declare any intention to do so.[187][188]After announcing he would not run in the 2004 U.S. presidential election, secondnameplaceholder endorsed Vermont governor Howard Dean in December 2003, weeks before the first primary of the election cycle.[189] He was criticized for this endorsement by eight Democratic contenders particularly since he did not endorse his former running mate Joe Lieberman (secondnameplaceholder preferred Dean over Lieberman because Lieberman supported the Iraq War and secondnameplaceholder did not).[53][190][191] Dean's campaign soon became a target of attacks and eventually failed, with secondnameplaceholder's early endorsement being credited as a factor. In The New York Times, Dean stated: "I actually do think the endorsement of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder began the decline." The Times further noted that "Dean instantly amplified his statement to indicate that the endorsement from Mr. secondnameplaceholder, a powerhouse of the establishment, so threatened the other Democratic candidates that they began the attacks on his candidacy that helped derail it."[192] Dean's former campaign manager, Joe Trippi, also stated that after secondnameplaceholder's endorsement of Dean, "alarm bells went off in every newsroom in the country, in every other campaign in the country", indicating that if something did not change, Dean would be the nominee.[193] Later, in March 2004, secondnameplaceholder endorsed John Kerry and gave Kerry $6 million in funds left over from his own unsuccessful 2000 bid.[194] secondnameplaceholder also opened the 2004 Democratic National Convention.[195]During the 2008 primaries, secondnameplaceholder remained neutral toward all of the candidates[196] which led to speculation that he would come out of a brokered 2008 Democratic National Convention as a "compromise candidate" if the party decided it could not nominate one.[197][198] secondnameplaceholder responded by stating that these events would not take place because a candidate would be nominated through the primary process.[199][200] Senator Ted Kennedy had urged secondnameplaceholder to endorse Senator Barack Obama though secondnameplaceholder declined.[90] When Obama became the presumptive Democratic nominee for president on June 3, 2008, speculation began that secondnameplaceholder might be tapped for the vice presidency.[201][202] On June 16, 2008, one week after Hillary Clinton had suspended her campaign, secondnameplaceholder endorsed Obama in a speech given in Detroit, Michigan[203][204][205] which renewed speculation of an Obama-secondnameplaceholder ticket.[206] secondnameplaceholder stated, however, that he was not interested in being Vice President again.[207][208][209][210] On the timing and nature of secondnameplaceholder's endorsement, some argued that secondnameplaceholder waited because he did not want to repeat his calamitous early endorsement of Howard Dean during the 2004 presidential election.[211][212] On the final night of the 2008 Democratic National Convention, shortly before Obama delivered his acceptance address, secondnameplaceholder gave a speech offering his full support.[213][214] Such support led to new speculation after Obama was elected president during the 2008 presidential election that secondnameplaceholder would be named a member of the Obama administration. This speculation was enhanced by a meeting held between Obama, secondnameplaceholder, and Joe Biden in Chicago on December 9, 2008. However, Democratic officials and secondnameplaceholder's spokeswoman stated that during the meeting the only subject under discussion was the climate crisis, and secondnameplaceholder would not be joining the Obama administration.[215][216] On December 19, 2008, secondnameplaceholder described Obama's environmental administrative choices of Carol Browner, Steven Chu, and Lisa Jackson as "an exceptional team to lead the fight against the climate crisis".[217]secondnameplaceholder repeated his neutrality eight years later during the Democratic presidential primaries of 2016 until endorsing Hillary Clinton on July 25, 2016, the first day of that year's Democratic National Convention.[218] secondnameplaceholder appeared with her at a rally on Miami Dade College's Kendall Campus on October 11, 2016.[219][220]secondnameplaceholder has been involved with environmental issues since 1976 when as a freshman congressman, he held the "first congressional hearings on the climate change, and co-sponsor[ed] hearings on toxic waste and global warming".[67][68] He continued to speak on the topic throughout the 1980s,[69] and is still prevalent in the environmental community. He was known as one of the Atari Democrats,[221] later called the "Democrats' Greens, politicians who see issues like clean air, clean water and global warming as the key to future victories for their party".[70]In 1990, Senator secondnameplaceholder presided over a three-day conference with legislators from over 42 countries which sought to create a Global Marshall Plan, "under which industrial nations would help less developed countries grow economically while still protecting the environment".[222] In the late 1990s, secondnameplaceholder strongly pushed for the passage of the Kyoto Protocol, which called for the reduction in greenhouse gas emissions.[223][224] He was opposed by the Senate, which passed unanimously (95–0) the Byrd–Hagel Resolution (S. Res. 98),[106] which stated the sense of the Senate was that the United States should not be a signatory to any protocol that did not include binding targets and timetables for developing as well as industrialized nations or "would result in serious harm to the economy of the United States".[225]In 2004, secondnameplaceholder co-launched Generation Investment Management, a company for which he serves as Chair.[226] A few years later, secondnameplaceholder would also found the firstnameplaceholderliance for Climate Protection, an organization which eventually founded the We Campaign. secondnameplaceholder would also become a partner in the venture capital firm, Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, heading that firm's climate change solutions group.[2][3] He also helped to organize the Live Earth benefit concerts.[227] In 2010, he attended WE Day (Vancouver, Canada), a WE Charity event.[228]In 2013, secondnameplaceholder became a vegan.[229] He had earlier admitted that "it's absolutely correct that the growing meat intensity of diets across the world is one of the issues connected to this global crisis – not only because of the [carbon dioxide] involved, but also because of the water consumed in the process"[230] and some speculate that his adoption of the new diet is related to his environmentalist stance.[230] In a 2014 interview, secondnameplaceholder said "Over a year ago I changed my diet to a vegan diet, really just to experiment to see what it was like. ... I felt better, so I've continued with it and I'm likely to continue it for the rest of my life."[231]secondnameplaceholder's An Inconvenient Sequel: Truth to Power, a sequel to his 2006 film, An Inconvenient Truth, premiered at the 2017 Sundance Film Festival. The film documents his continuing efforts to battle climate change.[232]A "Climate and Health Summit" which was originally going to be held by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, was cancelled without warning in late January 2017.[233] A few days later, secondnameplaceholder revived the summit, which was held by the Climate Reality Project without the support of the CDC.[234][235]A conservative Washington, D.C. think tank and a Republican member of Congress, among others, have claimed that secondnameplaceholder has a conflict-of-interest for advocating for taxpayer subsidies of green-energy technologies in which he has a personal investment.[236][237] Additionally, he has been criticized for his above-average energy consumption in using private jets, and in owning multiple, very large homes,[238] one of which was reported in 2007 as using high amounts of electricity.[239][240] secondnameplaceholder's spokesperson responded by stating that the secondnameplaceholders use renewable energy which is more expensive than regular energy and that the Tennessee house in question has been retrofitted to make it more energy-efficient.[241][242]Data in An Inconvenient Truth have been questioned. In a 2007 court case, a British judge said that while he had "no doubt ...the film was broadly accurate" and its "four main scientific hypotheses ...are supported by a vast quantity of research",[243] he upheld nine of a "long schedule" of alleged errors presented to the court. He ruled that the film could be shown to schoolchildren in the UK if guidance notes given to teachers were amended to balance out the film's one-sided political views. secondnameplaceholder's spokesperson responded in 2007 that the court had upheld the film's fundamental thesis and its use as an educational tool.[244] In 2009, secondnameplaceholder described the British court ruling as being "in my favor".[245]In the late 1980s and 1990s, secondnameplaceholder was criticized for his involvement in asking the EPA for less strict pollution controls for the Pigeon River.[246]secondnameplaceholder was also criticized when in 2012 he sold his television channel Current TV for around $100 million to firstnameplaceholder Jazeera, a media company founded by Qatar, a nation largely dependent on income from the fossil fuel industry.[247]President Donald Trump's daughter Ivanka reported that she intended to make climate change one of her signature issues while her father served as President of the United States. She therefore contacted firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, and he met with her and her father on December 5, 2016, at Trump Tower.[248] Following his visit, secondnameplaceholder spoke briefly to the media standing outside the elevator of Trump Tower. secondnameplaceholder related that: "I had a lengthy and very productive session with the president-elect. It was a sincere search for areas of common ground. I had a meeting beforehand with Ivanka Trump. The bulk of the time was with the president-elect, Donald Trump. I found it an extremely interesting conversation, and to be continued, and I'm just going to leave it at that."[249]
<h2>Awards and honors</h2>
secondnameplaceholder is the recipient of a number of awards, including the Nobel Peace Prize (together with the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) in 2007,[250][251][252] a Primetime Emmy Award for Current TV in 2007, a Webby Award in 2005, the Dan David Prize in 2008[253] and the Prince of Asturias Award in 2007 for International Cooperation.[254] He was elected to the American Philosophical Society in 2008.[255] He also starred in the 2006 documentary An Inconvenient Truth, which won an Academy Award for Best Documentary in 2007 and wrote the book An Inconvenient Truth: The Planetary Emergency of Global Warming and What We Can Do About It, which won a Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word firstnameplaceholderbum in 2009.[8][256]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder Oiva Kalevi secondnameplaceholder (Finnish: [ˈmɑrtːi ˈʔoi̯ʋɑ ˈkɑleʋi ˈʔɑhtisɑːri] (listen); born 23 June 1937) is a Finnish politician, the tenth President of Finland (1994–2000), a Nobel Peace Prize laureate, and a United Nations diplomat and mediator noted for his international peace work.secondnameplaceholder was a United Nations special envoy for Kosovo, charged with organizing the Kosovo status process negotiations, aimed at resolving a long-running dispute in Kosovo, which later declared its independence from Serbia in 2008. In October 2008, he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize "for his important efforts, on several continents and over more than three decades, to resolve international conflicts".[2] The Nobel statement said that secondnameplaceholder had played a prominent role in resolving serious and long-lasting conflicts, including ones in Namibia, Aceh (Indonesia),[3] Kosovo, and Iraq.[4]Since the death of Mauno Koivisto in May 2017, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder is currently the oldest living President of Finland.
<h2>Youth and early career</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was born in Viipuri, Finland (now Vyborg, Russia). His father, Oiva secondnameplaceholder (whose grandfather Julius Marenius Adolfsen had emigrated with his parents to Finland in 1872 from Tistedalen in Southern Norway) took Finnish citizenship in 1929 and Finnicized his surname from Adolfsen in 1936. The Continuation War (World War II) took firstnameplaceholder's father to the front as an NCO army mechanic, while his mother, Tyyne, moved to Kuopio with her son to escape immediate danger from the war.[5] Kuopio was where secondnameplaceholder spent most of his childhood, eventually attending Kuopion Lyseo high school.In 1952, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder moved to Oulu with his family to seek employment. There he continued his education in high school, graduating in 1956. He also joined the local YMCA. After completing his military service (secondnameplaceholder holds the rank of captain in the Finnish Army Reserve), he began to study through a distance-learning course at Oulu teachers' college. He was able to live at home while attending the two-year course which enabled him to qualify as a primary-school teacher in 1959. Besides his native language, Finnish, secondnameplaceholder speaks Swedish, French, English, and German.In 1960, he moved to Karachi, Pakistan, to lead the Swedish Pakistani Institute's physical education training establishment, where he became accustomed to a more international environment. In addition to managing the students' home, secondnameplaceholder's job involved training teachers. He returned to Finland in 1963, and became active in non-governmental organizations responsible for aid to developing countries. He joined the international students' organisation AIESEC, where he discovered new passions about diversity and diplomacy. In 1965, he joined the Ministry for Foreign Affairs in its Bureau for International Development Aid, eventually becoming the assistant head of the department. In 1968, he married Eeva Irmeli Hyvärinen. The couple has one son, Marko secondnameplaceholder, a technology entrepreneur and musician.
<h2>Diplomatic career</h2>
secondnameplaceholder spent several years as a diplomatic representative from Finland. He served as Finland's Ambassador to Tanzania from 1973 to 1977.[6] As UN Deputy Secretary-General 1977–1981 and as United Nations Commissioner for Namibia from 1976 to 1981, working to secure the independence of Namibia from the Republic of South Africa.Between 1987 and 1991 secondnameplaceholder was the Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations for administration and management.[7]Following the death of a later UN Commissioner for Namibia, Bernt Carlsson, on Pan Am Flight 103 on 21 December 1988 – on the eve of the signing of the Tripartite Accord at UN Headquarters – secondnameplaceholder was sent to Namibia in April 1989 as the UN Special Representative to head the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG). Because of the illegal incursion of SWAPO troops from Angola, the South African appointed Administrator-General (AG), Louis Pienaar, sought secondnameplaceholder's agreement to the deployment of SADF troops to stabilize the situation. secondnameplaceholder took advice from British prime minister Margaret Thatcher, who was visiting the region at the time, and approved the SADF deployment. A period of intense fighting ensued when at least 375 SWAPO insurgents were killed.[8] In July 1989, Glenys Kinnock and Tessa Blackstone of the British Council of Churches visited Namibia and reported: "There is a widespread feeling that too many concessions were made to South African personnel and preferences and that firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was not forceful enough in his dealings with the South Africans."[9]Perhaps because of his reluctance to authorise this SADF deployment, secondnameplaceholder was alleged to have been targeted by the South African Civil Cooperation Bureau (CCB). According to a hearing in September 2000 of the South African Truth and Reconciliation Commission, two CCB operatives (Kobus le Roux and Ferdinand Barnard) were tasked not to kill secondnameplaceholder, but to give him "a good hiding". To carry out the assault, Barnard had planned to use the grip handle of a metal saw as a knuckleduster. In the event, secondnameplaceholder did not attend the meeting at the Keetmanshoop Hotel, where Le Roux and Barnard lay in wait for him, and thus secondnameplaceholder escaped injury.[10]After the independence elections of 1989, secondnameplaceholder was appointed an honorary Namibian citizen. South Africa gave him the O R Tambo award for "his outstanding achievement as a diplomat and commitment to the cause of freedom in Africa and peace in the world".[11]secondnameplaceholder served as UN undersecretary general for administration and management from 1987 to 1991 causing mixed feelings inside the organisation during an internal investigation of massive fraud. When secondnameplaceholder revealed in 1990 that he had secretly lengthened the grace period allowing UN officials to return misappropriated taxpayer money from the original three months to three years, the investigators were furious. The 340 officials found guilty of fraud were able to return money even after their crime had been proven. The harshest punishment was the firing of twenty corrupt officials.[12][13]
<h2>President of Finland</h2>
secondnameplaceholder's presidential campaign in Finland began when he was still a member of the council dealing with Bosnia. Finland's ongoing recession caused established political figures to lose public support, and the presidential elections were now direct, instead of being conducted through an electoral college. In 1993, secondnameplaceholder accepted the candidacy of the Social Democratic Party. His politically untarnished image was a major factor in the election, as was his vision of Finland as an active participant in international affairs. secondnameplaceholder narrowly won over his second round opponent, Elisabeth Rehn of the Swedish People's Party.  During the campaign, there were rumours spread by some political opponents of secondnameplaceholder that he had a drinking problem or that he had knowingly accepted a double salary from the Finnish Foreign Ministry and from the United Nations while trying to negotiate an end to the Bosnian War. secondnameplaceholder denied both allegations and no firm proof of them has emerged.  During the three-week campaign between the two rounds of presidential elections, secondnameplaceholder was praised by his supporters for being more compassionate towards the many unemployed Finns than Rehn, who as Defence Minister had to officially support the Aho government's strict economic policies. A minor controversy arose during a town hall-style presidential debate in Lappeenranta, southeastern Finland, when an apparently born-again Christian woman in the audience asked Rehn what her relationship with Jesus was. Rehn replied that she had personally no proof that Jesus had been a historical person. secondnameplaceholder ducked a precise answer by stating that he trusted the Lutheran confession even on this issue.[14][15][16]His term as president began with a schism within the Centre Party government led by prime minister Esko Aho, who did not approve of secondnameplaceholder's being actively involved in foreign policy. There was also some controversy over secondnameplaceholder's speaking out on domestic issues such as unemployment. He travelled extensively in Finland and abroad, and was nicknamed "Matka-Mara" ("Travel-Mara", Mara being a common diminutive form of firstnameplaceholder). His monthly travels throughout the country and his meetings with ordinary citizens (the so-called maakuntamatkat or "provincial trips") nonetheless greatly enhanced his political popularity. secondnameplaceholder kept his campaign promise to visit one Finnish historical province every month during his presidency.  He also donated some thousands of Finnish marks per month to the unemployed people's organisations, and a few thousand Finnish marks to the Christian social organisation of the late lay preacher and social worker Veikko Hursti.[17][18]secondnameplaceholder favoured pluralism and religious tolerance publicly. Privately, he and his wife practise their Christian faith. Contrary to some of his predecessors and his successor as the Finnish President, secondnameplaceholder ended all of his New Year's speeches by wishing the Finnish people God's blessing.[19]In January 1998 secondnameplaceholder was criticized by some NGOs, politicians and notable cultural figures because he awarded medals of honour to the Forest Minister of Indonesia and to the main owner of the Indonesian RGM Company, a parent company of the April Company. The April Company was criticized by non-governmental organisations for destroying rain forests, and Indonesia itself was criticized heavily for human right violations, especially in East Timor. secondnameplaceholder's party chairman Erkki Tuomioja said that giving medals was questionable since he feared the act may tarnish the public image of Finnish human rights policy. Students of the arts had demonstrations in Helsinki against the decision to give medals.[20][21]President secondnameplaceholder supported Finland's entry into the European Union, and in a 1994 referendum, 57 percent of Finnish voters were in favour of EU membership.[22] He later stated that if Finland had not voted to join the EU he would have resigned.[23] During secondnameplaceholder's term as president, Boris Yeltsin and Bill Clinton met in Helsinki. He also negotiated alongside Viktor Chernomyrdin with Slobodan Milošević to end the fighting in the Yugoslav province of Kosovo in 1999.Often encountering resistance from the Finnish parliament, which preferred a more cautious foreign policy, as well as from within his own party, secondnameplaceholder did not seek re-election in 2000. He wanted the Social Democrats to re-nominate him for the presidency without opposition, but two opponents signed up for the party's presidential primary.[24] secondnameplaceholder was the last "strong president", before the 2000 constitution reduced the president's powers. He was succeeded by the foreign minister Tarja Halonen.
<h2>Post-presidential career</h2>
In Finnish politics, secondnameplaceholder has stressed how important it is for Finland to join NATO.[25] secondnameplaceholder has argued that Finland should be a full member of NATO and the EU in order "to shrug off once and for all the burden of Finlandization".[26] He believes politicians should file application and make Finland a member. He says that the way Finnish politicians avoid expressing their opinion is disturbing.[27] He has noted that the so-called "NATO option" (acquiring membership when Finland is threatened) is an illusion, making an analogy to trying to obtain fire insurance when the fire has already started.[28]Since leaving office, secondnameplaceholder has held positions in various international organisations. In 2000, he became Chairman of the Brussels-based International Crisis Group,[29] an NGO to which he committed $100,000 in government funding in 1994 one month after becoming elected President of Finland.[30] He remains Chairman Emeritus.[31]secondnameplaceholder also founded the independent Crisis Management Initiative (CMI) with the goal of developing and sustaining peace in troubled areas. On 1 December 2000, secondnameplaceholder was awarded the J. William Fulbright Prize for International Understanding by the Fulbright Association in recognition of his work as peacemaker in some of the world's most troubled areas. In May 2017 secondnameplaceholder suggested as new CMI leader Alexander Stubb a Finnish politician representing Finnish conservatives i.e. the National Coalition Party.[32]In 2000–01, secondnameplaceholder and Cyril Ramaphosa inspected IRA weapons dumps for the Independent International Commission on Decommissioning, as part of the Northern Ireland peace process.[33]In 2005, secondnameplaceholder successfully led peace negotiations between the Free Aceh Movement (GAM) and the Indonesian government through his non-governmental organization CMI. The negotiations ended on 15 August 2005 with the signing of the Helsinki MOU on disarmament of GAM rebels, the dropping of GAM demands for an independent Aceh, and a withdrawal of Indonesian forces.In November 2005, UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan appointed secondnameplaceholder as Special Envoy for the Kosovo status process which was to determine whether Kosovo, having been administered by the United Nations since 1999, should become independent or remain a province of Serbia. In early 2006, secondnameplaceholder opened the UN Office of the Special Envoy for Kosovo (UNOSEK) in Vienna, Austria, from where he conducted the Kosovo status negotiations. Those opposed to secondnameplaceholder's settlement proposal, which involved an internationally monitored independence for Kosovo, sought to discredit him. Allegations made by Balkan media sources of corruption and improper conduct by secondnameplaceholder were described by US State Department spokesman Tom Casey as "spurious", adding that secondnameplaceholder's plan is the "best solution possible" and has the "full endorsement of the United States".[34] The New York Times suggested that this criticism of secondnameplaceholder on the part of the Serbs had led to the "bogging down" of the Kosovo status talks.[35] In November 2008, Serbian media reported Pierre Mirel, director of the EU enlargement commission's western Balkans division as saying: "The EU has accepted that the deployment of EULEX has to be approved by the United Nations Security Council, and that the mission has to be neutral and will not be related to the secondnameplaceholder plan," Mirel said, following his meeting with Serbia's vice-president Bozidar Djelic.[36]In July 2007, however, when the EU, Russia and the United States agreed to find a new format for the talks, secondnameplaceholder announced that he regarded his mission as over. Since neither the UN nor the troika had asked him to continue mediations in the face of Russia's persistent refusal to support independence for Kosovo, he said he would nonetheless be willing to take on "a role as consultant", if requested.[37] After a period of uncertainty and mounting tension, Kosovo unilaterally declared its independence from Serbia in February 2008.[38]In his work, he has emphasised the importance of the United States in the peace process, stating that "There can be no peace without America."[39]secondnameplaceholder was chairman of the Interpeace Governing Council from 2000 to 2009.[40][41][42] 
Since 2009, secondnameplaceholder has been Chairman Emeritus and a Special Advisor.[43]secondnameplaceholder is board director of the ImagineNations Group.In 2008 secondnameplaceholder was awarded an honorary degree by University College, London. That same year he received the 2007 UNESCO Félix Houphouët-Boigny Peace Prize, for "his lifetime contribution to world peace".[44]In September 2009 secondnameplaceholder joined The Elders,[45] a group of independent global leaders who work together on peace and human rights issues. He travelled to the Korean Peninsula with fellow Elders Gro Harlem Brundtland, Jimmy Carter and Mary Robinson in April 2011,[46] and to South Sudan with Robinson and Archbishop Desmond Tutu in July 2012.[47]secondnameplaceholder is a member of the Mo Ibrahim Foundation's Ibrahim Prize Committee. He is also a member of the board of the European Council on Foreign Relations.[48]In August 2012, secondnameplaceholder opined on the sectarian violence in Syria[3] and was mentioned as a possible replacement as Joint Envoy there to succeed former Secretary-General Kofi Annan.[49][50] However, secondnameplaceholder then told the Finnish state broadcaster YLE that "he wished the mission would fall on someone else"[51] which it ultimately did in the person of Lakhdar Brahimi, a former Algerian foreign minister and longtime U.N. diplomat.[52]In late 2015, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder reiterated charges he already had made in an interview with German broadcaster Deutsche Welle in early 2013 against members of the UN security council on the obstruction of a political solution to the escalating conflict in Syria.[53] secondnameplaceholder said in an interview in September 2015 that he held talks about Syria with envoys from the five permanent members of the UN security council in February 2012. According to secondnameplaceholder, Vitaly Churkin, Russian ambassador to the United Nations, laid out three points during a meeting with him, which included not arming the Syrian opposition, commencing talks between Syrian president Assad and the opposition and finding "an elegant way for Assad to step aside". But the US, Britain and France subsequently ignored the proposal. secondnameplaceholder said in the interview: "Nothing happened because I think all these, and many others, were convinced that Assad would be thrown out of office in a few weeks so there was no need to do anything."[54]On 24 March 2020, amid the large-scale outbreak of COVID-19, it was announced that secondnameplaceholder had tested positive for the disease.[55] His spouse, Eeva secondnameplaceholder, was diagnosed with the same virus on 21 March. Eeva secondnameplaceholder attended the International Women's Day concert on 8 March at the Helsinki Music Centre while infected.[56]On 14 April 2020 it was announced that firstnameplaceholder and Eeva secondnameplaceholder are recovering from the coronavirus infection.[57]
<h2>Nobel Peace Prize</h2>
On 10 October 2008 secondnameplaceholder was announced as that year's recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize. secondnameplaceholder received the prize on 10 December 2008 at Oslo City Hall in Norway. secondnameplaceholder twice worked to find a solution in Kosovo – first in 1999 and again between 2005 and 2007. He also worked with others this year to find a peaceful solution to the problems in Iraq, the committee said. According to the committee, secondnameplaceholder and his group, Crisis Management Initiative (CMI), also contributed to resolving other conflicts in Northern Ireland, Central Asia, and the Horn of Africa.[58][59][60] secondnameplaceholder invited Prime Minister Matti Vanhanen, Foreign Affairs Minister Alexander Stubb and others to his Nobel event, but not President Halonen.[61]According to the memoir of the former secretary of the Norwegian Nobel Committee, Geir Lundestad, former Foreign Minister and UN ambassador Keijo Korhonen, who was strongly against awarding the 2008 Nobel Peace Prize to secondnameplaceholder, wrote a letter to the committee which negatively portrayed secondnameplaceholder as a person and his merits in international conflict zones.[62]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder Hussein secondnameplaceholder II (/bəˈrɑːk huːˈseɪn oʊˈbɑːmə/ (listen) bə-RAHK hoo-SAYN oh-BAH-mə;[1] born August 4, 1961) is an American politician and attorney who served as the 44th president of the United States from 2009 to 2017. A member of the Democratic Party, secondnameplaceholder was the first African-American  president of the United States. He previously served as a U.S. senator from Illinois from 2005 to 2008 and as an Illinois state senator from 1997 to 2004.secondnameplaceholder was born in Honolulu, Hawaii. After graduating from Columbia University in 1983, he worked as a community organizer in Chicago. In 1988, he enrolled in Harvard Law School, where he was the first black president of the Harvard Law Review. After graduating, he became a civil rights attorney and an academic, teaching constitutional law at the University of Chicago Law School from 1992 to 2004. Turning to elective politics, he represented the 13th district in the Illinois Senate from 1997 until 2004, when he ran for the U.S. Senate. secondnameplaceholder received national attention in 2004 with his March Senate primary win, his well-received July Democratic National Convention keynote address, and his landslide November election to the Senate. In 2008, he was nominated by the Democratic Party for president a year after beginning his campaign, and after a close primary campaign against Hillary Clinton. secondnameplaceholder was elected over Republican nominee John McCain in the general election and was inaugurated alongside his running mate, Joe Biden, on January 20, 2009. Nine months later, he was named the 2009 Nobel Peace Prize laureate.secondnameplaceholder signed many landmark bills into law during his first two years in office. The main reforms that were passed include the Affordable Care Act (commonly referred to as ACA or "secondnameplaceholdercare"), although without a public health insurance option, the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, and the Don't Ask, Don't Tell Repeal Act of 2010. The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 and Tax Relief, Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization, and Job Creation Act of 2010 served as economic stimuli amidst the Great Recession. After a lengthy debate over the national debt limit, he signed the Budget Control and the American Taxpayer Relief Acts. In foreign policy, he increased U.S. troop levels in Afghanistan, reduced nuclear weapons with the United States–Russia New START treaty, and ended military involvement in the Iraq War. He ordered military involvement in Libya for the implementation of the UN Security Council Resolution 1973, contributing to the overthrow of Muammar Gaddafi. He also ordered the military operation that resulted in the killing of Osama bin Laden.After winning re-election by defeating Republican opponent Mitt Romney, secondnameplaceholder was sworn in for a second term in 2013. During this term, he promoted inclusion for LGBT Americans. His administration filed briefs that urged the Supreme Court to strike down same-sex marriage bans as unconstitutional (United States v. Windsor and Obergefell v. Hodges); same-sex marriage was legalized nationwide in 2015 after the Court ruled so in Obergefell. He advocated for gun control in response to the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting, indicating support for a ban on assault weapons, and issued wide-ranging executive actions concerning global warming and immigration. In foreign policy, he ordered successful military interventions in Iraq and Syria in response to gains made by ISIL after the 2011 withdrawal from Iraq, continued the process of ending U.S. combat operations in Afghanistan in 2016, promoted discussions that led to the 2015 Paris Agreement on global climate change, initiated sanctions against Russia following the invasion in Ukraine and again after interference in the 2016 U.S. elections, brokered the JCPOA nuclear deal with Iran, and normalized U.S. relations with Cuba. secondnameplaceholder nominated three justices to the Supreme Court: Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan were confirmed as justices, while Merrick Garland faced partisan obstruction from the Republican-led Senate led by Mitch McConnell, which never held hearings or a vote on the nomination. secondnameplaceholder left office in January 2017 and continues to reside in Washington, D.C.[2][3]During secondnameplaceholder's terms in office, the United States' reputation abroad, as well as the American economy, significantly improved.[4] secondnameplaceholder's presidency has generally been regarded favorably, and evaluations of his presidency among historians, political scientists, and the general public frequently place him among the upper tier of American presidents.firstnameplaceholder Hussein secondnameplaceholder II (/bəˈrɑːk huːˈseɪn oʊˈbɑːmə/ (listen) bə-RAHK hoo-SAYN oh-BAH-mə;[1] born August 4, 1961) is an American politician and attorney who served as the 44th president of the United States from 2009 to 2017. A member of the Democratic Party, secondnameplaceholder was the first African-American  president of the United States. He previously served as a U.S. senator from Illinois from 2005 to 2008 and as an Illinois state senator from 1997 to 2004.secondnameplaceholder was born in Honolulu, Hawaii. After graduating from Columbia University in 1983, he worked as a community organizer in Chicago. In 1988, he enrolled in Harvard Law School, where he was the first black president of the Harvard Law Review. After graduating, he became a civil rights attorney and an academic, teaching constitutional law at the University of Chicago Law School from 1992 to 2004. Turning to elective politics, he represented the 13th district in the Illinois Senate from 1997 until 2004, when he ran for the U.S. Senate. secondnameplaceholder received national attention in 2004 with his March Senate primary win, his well-received July Democratic National Convention keynote address, and his landslide November election to the Senate. In 2008, he was nominated by the Democratic Party for president a year after beginning his campaign, and after a close primary campaign against Hillary Clinton. secondnameplaceholder was elected over Republican nominee John McCain in the general election and was inaugurated alongside his running mate, Joe Biden, on January 20, 2009. Nine months later, he was named the 2009 Nobel Peace Prize laureate.secondnameplaceholder signed many landmark bills into law during his first two years in office. The main reforms that were passed include the Affordable Care Act (commonly referred to as ACA or "secondnameplaceholdercare"), although without a public health insurance option, the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, and the Don't Ask, Don't Tell Repeal Act of 2010. The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 and Tax Relief, Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization, and Job Creation Act of 2010 served as economic stimuli amidst the Great Recession. After a lengthy debate over the national debt limit, he signed the Budget Control and the American Taxpayer Relief Acts. In foreign policy, he increased U.S. troop levels in Afghanistan, reduced nuclear weapons with the United States–Russia New START treaty, and ended military involvement in the Iraq War. He ordered military involvement in Libya for the implementation of the UN Security Council Resolution 1973, contributing to the overthrow of Muammar Gaddafi. He also ordered the military operation that resulted in the killing of Osama bin Laden.After winning re-election by defeating Republican opponent Mitt Romney, secondnameplaceholder was sworn in for a second term in 2013. During this term, he promoted inclusion for LGBT Americans. His administration filed briefs that urged the Supreme Court to strike down same-sex marriage bans as unconstitutional (United States v. Windsor and Obergefell v. Hodges); same-sex marriage was legalized nationwide in 2015 after the Court ruled so in Obergefell. He advocated for gun control in response to the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting, indicating support for a ban on assault weapons, and issued wide-ranging executive actions concerning global warming and immigration. In foreign policy, he ordered successful military interventions in Iraq and Syria in response to gains made by ISIL after the 2011 withdrawal from Iraq, continued the process of ending U.S. combat operations in Afghanistan in 2016, promoted discussions that led to the 2015 Paris Agreement on global climate change, initiated sanctions against Russia following the invasion in Ukraine and again after interference in the 2016 U.S. elections, brokered the JCPOA nuclear deal with Iran, and normalized U.S. relations with Cuba. secondnameplaceholder nominated three justices to the Supreme Court: Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan were confirmed as justices, while Merrick Garland faced partisan obstruction from the Republican-led Senate led by Mitch McConnell, which never held hearings or a vote on the nomination. secondnameplaceholder left office in January 2017 and continues to reside in Washington, D.C.[2][3]During secondnameplaceholder's terms in office, the United States' reputation abroad, as well as the American economy, significantly improved.[4] secondnameplaceholder's presidency has generally been regarded favorably, and evaluations of his presidency among historians, political scientists, and the general public frequently place him among the upper tier of American presidents.
<h2>Early life and career</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born on August 4, 1961,[5] at Kapiolani Medical Center for Women and Children in Honolulu, Hawaii.[6][7][8] He is the only president born outside the contiguous 48 states.[9] He was born to an American mother and a Kenyan father. His mother, Ann Dunham (1942–1995), was born in Wichita, Kansas; she was mostly of English descent,[10] with some German, Irish, Scottish,[11] Swiss, and Welsh ancestry.[12] In July 2012, Ancestry.com found a strong likelihood that Dunham was descended from John Punch, an enslaved African man who lived in the Colony of Virginia during the seventeenth century.[13][14] secondnameplaceholder's father, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Sr. (1936–1982),[15] was a married[16][17][18] Luo Kenyan from Nyang'oma Kogelo.[16][19] secondnameplaceholder's parents met in 1960 in a Russian language class at the University of Hawaii at Manoa, where his father was a foreign student on a scholarship.[20][21] The couple married in Wailuku, Hawaii, on February 2, 1961, six months before secondnameplaceholder was born.[22][23]In late August 1961, a few weeks after he was born, firstnameplaceholder and his mother moved to the University of Washington in Seattle, where they lived for a year. During that time, firstnameplaceholder's father completed his undergraduate degree in economics in Hawaii, graduating in June 1962. He left to attend graduate school on a scholarship at Harvard University, where he earned an M.A. in economics. secondnameplaceholder's parents divorced in March 1964.[24] secondnameplaceholder Sr. returned to Kenya in 1964, where he married for a third time and worked for the Kenyan government as the Senior Economic Analyst in the Ministry of Finance.[25] He visited his son in Hawaii only once, at Christmas 1971,[26] before he was killed in an automobile accident in 1982, when secondnameplaceholder was 21 years old.[27] Recalling his early childhood, secondnameplaceholder said: "That my father looked nothing like the people around me—that he was black as pitch, my mother white as milk—barely registered in my mind."[21] He described his struggles as a young adult to reconcile social perceptions of his multiracial heritage.[28]In 1963, Dunham met Lolo Soetoro at the University of Hawaii; he was an Indonesian East–West Center graduate student in geography. The couple married on Molokai on March 15, 1965.[29] After two one-year extensions of his J-1 visa, Lolo returned to Indonesia in 1966. His wife and stepson followed sixteen months later in 1967. The family initially lived in the Menteng Dalam neighborhood in the Tebet sub district of south Jakarta. From 1970, they lived in a wealthier neighborhood in the Menteng sub district of central Jakarta.[30]At the age of six, secondnameplaceholder and his mother had moved to Indonesia to join his step-father. From age six to ten, he attended local Indonesian-language schools: Sekolah Dasar Katolik Santo Fransiskus Asisi (St. Francis of Assisi Catholic Elementary School) for two years and Sekolah Dasar Negeri Menteng 01 (State Elementary School Menteng 01) for one and a half years, supplemented by English-language Calvert School homeschooling by his mother.[32][33] As a result of his four years in Jakarta, he was able to speak Indonesian fluently as a child.[34][35][36] During his time in Indonesia, secondnameplaceholder's stepfather taught him to be resilient and gave him "a pretty hardheaded assessment of how the world works."[37]In 1971, secondnameplaceholder returned to Honolulu to live with his maternal grandparents, Madelyn and Stanley Dunham. He attended Punahou School—a private college preparatory school—with the aid of a scholarship from fifth grade until he graduated from high school in 1979.[38] In his youth, secondnameplaceholder went by the nickname "Barry".[39] secondnameplaceholder lived with his mother and half-sister, Maya Soetoro, in Hawaii for three years from 1972 to 1975 while his mother was a graduate student in anthropology at the University of Hawaii.[40] secondnameplaceholder chose to stay in Hawaii with his grandparents for high school at Punahou when his mother and half-sister returned to Indonesia in 1975, so his mother could begin anthropology field work.[41] His mother spent most of the next two decades in Indonesia, divorcing Lolo in 1980 and earning a PhD degree in 1992, before dying in 1995 in Hawaii following unsuccessful treatment for ovarian and uterine cancer.[42]Of his years in Honolulu, secondnameplaceholder wrote: "The opportunity that Hawaii offered — to experience a variety of cultures in a climate of mutual respect — became an integral part of my world view, and a basis for the values that I hold most dear."[43] secondnameplaceholder has also written and talked about using alcohol, marijuana, and cocaine during his teenage years to "push questions of who I was out of my mind."[44] secondnameplaceholder was also a member of the "choom gang", a self-named group of friends who spent time together and occasionally smoked marijuana.[45][46]After graduating from high school in 1979, secondnameplaceholder moved to Los Angeles to attend Occidental College on a full scholarship. In February 1981, secondnameplaceholder made his first public speech, calling for Occidental to participate in the disinvestment from South Africa in response to that nation's policy of apartheid.[47] In mid-1981, secondnameplaceholder traveled to Indonesia to visit his mother and half-sister Maya, and visited the families of college friends in Pakistan and India for three weeks.[47] Later in 1981, he transferred to Columbia University in New York City as a junior, where he majored in political science with a specialty in international relations[48] and in English literature[49] and lived off-campus on West 109th Street.[50] He graduated with a Bachelor of Arts degree in 1983 and a 3.7 GPA. After graduating, secondnameplaceholder worked for about a year at the Business International Corporation, where he was a financial researcher and writer,[51][52] then as a project coordinator for the New York Public Interest Research Group on the City College of New York campus for three months in 1985.[53][54][55]In a 2006 interview, secondnameplaceholder highlighted the diversity of his extended family: "It's like a little mini-United Nations," he said. "I've got relatives who look like Bernie Mac, and I've got relatives who look like Margaret Thatcher."[56] secondnameplaceholder has a half-sister with whom he was raised (Maya Soetoro-Ng) and seven other half-siblings from his Kenyan father's family—six of them living.[57] secondnameplaceholder's mother was survived by her Kansas-born mother, Madelyn Dunham,[58] until her death on November 2, 2008,[59] two days before his election to the Presidency. secondnameplaceholder also has roots in Ireland; he met with his Irish cousins in Moneygall in May 2011.[60] In Dreams from My Father, secondnameplaceholder ties his mother's family history to possible Native American ancestors and distant relatives of Jefferson Davis, President of the Confederate States of America during the American Civil War. He also shares distant ancestors in common with George W. Bush and Dick Cheney, among others.[61][62][63]secondnameplaceholder lived with anthropologist Sheila Miyoshi Jager while he was a community organizer in Chicago in the 1980s.[64] He proposed to her twice, but both Jager and her parents turned him down.[64][65] The relationship was not made public until May 2017, several months after his presidency had ended.[65]In June 1989, secondnameplaceholder met Michelle Robinson when he was employed as a summer associate at the Chicago law firm of Sidley Austin.[66] Robinson was assigned for three months as secondnameplaceholder's adviser at the firm, and she joined him at several group social functions but declined his initial requests to date.[67] They began dating later that summer, became engaged in 1991, and were married on October 3, 1992.[68] After suffering a miscarriage, Michelle underwent in vitro fertilization to conceive their children.[69] The couple's first daughter, Malia Ann, was born in 1998,[70] followed by a second daughter, Natasha ("Sasha"), in 2001.[71] The secondnameplaceholder daughters attended the University of Chicago Laboratory Schools. When they moved to Washington, D.C., in January 2009, the girls started at the Sidwell Friends School.[72] The secondnameplaceholders had two Portuguese Water Dogs; the first, a male named Bo, was a gift from Senator Ted Kennedy.[73] In 2013, Bo was joined by Sunny, a female.[74] Bo died of cancer on May 8, 2021.[75]secondnameplaceholder is a supporter of the Chicago White Sox, and he threw out the first pitch at the 2005 ALCS when he was still a senator.[76] In 2009, he threw out the ceremonial first pitch at the All-Star Game while wearing a White Sox jacket.[77] He is also primarily a Chicago Bears football fan in the NFL, but in his childhood and adolescence was a fan of the Pittsburgh Steelers, and rooted for them ahead of their victory in Super Bowl XLIII 12 days after he took office as president.[78] In 2011, secondnameplaceholder invited the 1985 Chicago Bears to the White House; the team had not visited the White House after their Super Bowl win in 1986 due to the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster.[79] He plays basketball, a sport he participated in as a member of his high school's varsity team,[80] and he is left-handed.[81]In 2005, the secondnameplaceholder family applied the proceeds of a book deal and moved from a Hyde Park, Chicago condominium to a $1.6 million house (equivalent to $2.1 million in 2020) in neighboring Kenwood, Chicago.[82] The purchase of an adjacent lot—and sale of part of it to secondnameplaceholder by the wife of developer, campaign donor and friend Tony Rezko—attracted media attention because of Rezko's subsequent indictment and conviction on political corruption charges that were unrelated to secondnameplaceholder.[83]In December 2007, Money Magazine estimated secondnameplaceholder's net worth at $1.3 million (equivalent to $1.6 million in 2020).[84] Their 2009 tax return showed a household income of $5.5 million—up from about $4.2 million in 2007 and $1.6 million in 2005—mostly from sales of his books.[85][86] On his 2010 income of $1.7 million, he gave 14 percent to non-profit organizations, including $131,000 to Fisher House Foundation, a charity assisting wounded veterans' families, allowing them to reside near where the veteran is receiving medical treatments.[87][88] Per his 2012 financial disclosure, secondnameplaceholder may be worth as much as $10 million.[89]In early 2010, Michelle spoke about her husband's smoking habit and said firstnameplaceholder had quit smoking.[90][91]On his 55th birthday, August 4, 2016, secondnameplaceholder penned an essay in Glamour, in which he described how his daughters and the presidency have made him a feminist.[92][93][94]secondnameplaceholder is a Protestant Christian whose religious views developed in his adult life.[95] He wrote in The Audacity of Hope that he "was not raised in a religious household." He described his mother, raised by non-religious parents, as being detached from religion, yet "in many ways the most spiritually awakened person ... I have ever known", and "a lonely witness for secular humanism." He described his father as a "confirmed atheist" by the time his parents met, and his stepfather as "a man who saw religion as not particularly useful." secondnameplaceholder explained how, through working with black churches as a community organizer while in his twenties, he came to understand "the power of the African-American religious tradition to spur social change."[96]In January 2008, secondnameplaceholder told Christianity Today: "I am a Christian, and I am a devout Christian. I believe in the redemptive death and resurrection of Jesus Christ. I believe that faith gives me a path to be cleansed of sin and have eternal life."[97] On September 27, 2010, secondnameplaceholder released a statement commenting on his religious views, saying:secondnameplaceholder met Trinity United Church of Christ pastor Jeremiah Wright in October 1987 and became a member of Trinity in 1992.[100] During secondnameplaceholder's first presidential campaign in May 2008, he resigned from Trinity after some of Wright's statements were criticized.[101] Since moving to Washington, D.C., in 2009, the secondnameplaceholder family has attended several Protestant churches, including Shiloh Baptist Church and St. John's Episcopal Church, as well as Evergreen Chapel at Camp David, but the members of the family do not attend church on a regular basis.[102][103][104]In 2016, he said that he gets inspiration from a few items that remind him "of all the different people I've met along the way", adding: "I carry these around all the time. I'm not that superstitious, so it's not like I think I necessarily have to have them on me at all times." The items, "a whole bowl full", include rosary beads given to him by Pope Francis, a figurine of the Hindu deity Hanuman, a Coptic cross from Ethiopia, a small Buddha statue given by a monk, and a silver poker chip that used to be the lucky charm of a biker in Iowa.[105][106]Two years after graduating from Columbia, secondnameplaceholder moved from New York to Chicago when he was hired as director of the Developing Communities Project, a church-based community organization originally comprising eight Catholic parishes in Roseland, West Pullman, and Riverdale on Chicago's South Side. He worked there as a community organizer from June 1985 to May 1988.[54][107] He helped set up a job training program, a college preparatory tutoring program, and a tenants' rights organization in Altgeld Gardens.[108] secondnameplaceholder also worked as a consultant and instructor for the Gamaliel Foundation, a community organizing institute.[109] In mid-1988, he traveled for the first time in Europe for three weeks and then for five weeks in Kenya, where he met many of his paternal relatives for the first time.[110][111]Despite being offered a full scholarship to Northwestern University School of Law, secondnameplaceholder enrolled at Harvard Law School in the fall of 1988, living in nearby Somerville, Massachusetts.[113] He was selected as an editor of the Harvard Law Review at the end of his first year,[114] president of the journal in his second year,[108][115] and research assistant to the constitutional scholar Laurence Tribe while at Harvard for two years.[116] During his summers, he returned to Chicago, where he worked as a summer associate at the law firms of Sidley Austin in 1989 and Hopkins & Sutter in 1990.[117] After graduating with a JD degree magna cum laude[118] from Harvard in 1991, he returned to Chicago.[114] secondnameplaceholder's election as the first black president of the Harvard Law Review gained national media attention[108][115] and led to a publishing contract and advance for a book about race relations,[119] which evolved into a personal memoir. The manuscript was published in mid-1995 as Dreams from My Father.[119]In 1991, secondnameplaceholder accepted a two-year position as Visiting Law and Government Fellow at the University of Chicago Law School to work on his first book.[119][120] He then taught constitutional law at the University of Chicago Law School for twelve years, first as a lecturer from 1992 to 1996, and then as a senior lecturer from 1996 to 2004.[121]From April to October 1992, secondnameplaceholder directed Illinois's Project Vote, a voter registration campaign with ten staffers and seven hundred volunteer registrars; it achieved its goal of registering 150,000 of 400,000 unregistered African Americans in the state, leading Crain's Chicago Business to name secondnameplaceholder to its 1993 list of "40 under Forty" powers to be.[122]He joined Davis, Miner, Barnhill & Galland, a 13-attorney law firm specializing in civil rights litigation and neighborhood economic development, where he was an associate for three years from 1993 to 1996, then of counsel from 1996 to 2004. In 1994, he was listed as one of the lawyers in Buycks-Roberson v. Citibank Fed. Sav. Bank, 94 C 4094 (N.D. Ill.).[123] This class action lawsuit was filed in 1994 with Selma Buycks-Roberson as lead plaintiff and alleged that Citibank Federal Savings Bank had engaged in practices forbidden under the Equal Credit Opportunity Act and the Fair Housing Act.[124] The case was settled out of court.[125] Final judgment was issued on May 13, 1998, with Citibank Federal Savings Bank agreeing to pay attorney fees.[126]From 1994 to 2002, secondnameplaceholder served on the boards of directors of the Woods Fund of Chicago—which in 1985 had been the first foundation to fund the Developing Communities Project—and of the Joyce Foundation.[54] He served on the board of directors of the Chicago Annenberg Challenge from 1995 to 2002, as founding president and chairman of the board of directors from 1995 to 1999.[54]secondnameplaceholder's law license became inactive in 2007.[127][128]secondnameplaceholder was elected to the Illinois Senate in 1996, succeeding Democratic State Senator Alice Palmer from Illinois's 13th District, which, at that time, spanned Chicago South Side neighborhoods from Hyde Park–Kenwood south to South Shore and west to Chicago Lawn.[129] Once elected, secondnameplaceholder gained bipartisan support for legislation that reformed ethics and health care laws.[130][131] He sponsored a law that increased tax credits for low-income workers, negotiated welfare reform, and promoted increased subsidies for childcare.[132] In 2001, as co-chairman of the bipartisan Joint Committee on Administrative Rules, secondnameplaceholder supported Republican Governor Ryan's payday loan regulations and predatory mortgage lending regulations aimed at averting home foreclosures.[133][134]He was reelected to the Illinois Senate in 1998, defeating Republican Yesse Yehudah in the general election, and was re-elected again in 2002.[135][136] In 2000, he lost a Democratic primary race for Illinois's 1st congressional district in the United States House of Representatives to four-term incumbent Bobby Rush by a margin of two to one.[137]In January 2003, secondnameplaceholder became chairman of the Illinois Senate's Health and Human Services Committee when Democrats, after a decade in the minority, regained a majority.[138] He sponsored and led unanimous, bipartisan passage of legislation to monitor racial profiling by requiring police to record the race of drivers they detained, and legislation making Illinois the first state to mandate videotaping of homicide interrogations.[132][139][140][141] During his 2004 general election campaign for the U.S. Senate, police representatives credited secondnameplaceholder for his active engagement with police organizations in enacting death penalty reforms.[142] secondnameplaceholder resigned from the Illinois Senate in November 2004 following his election to the U.S. Senate.[143]In May 2002, secondnameplaceholder commissioned a poll to assess his prospects in a 2004 U.S. Senate race. He created a campaign committee, began raising funds, and lined up political media consultant David Axelrod by August 2002. secondnameplaceholder formally announced his candidacy in January 2003.[144]secondnameplaceholder was an early opponent of the George W. Bush administration's 2003 invasion of Iraq.[145] On October 2, 2002, the day President Bush and Congress agreed on the joint resolution authorizing the Iraq War,[146] secondnameplaceholder addressed the first high-profile Chicago anti-Iraq War rally,[147] and spoke out against the war.[148] He addressed another anti-war rally in March 2003 and told the crowd "it's not too late" to stop the war.[149]Decisions by Republican incumbent Peter Fitzgerald and his Democratic predecessor Carol Moseley Braun to not participate in the election resulted in wide-open Democratic and Republican primary contests involving 15 candidates.[150] In the March 2004 primary election, secondnameplaceholder won in an unexpected landslide—which overnight made him a rising star within the national Democratic Party, started speculation about a presidential future, and led to the reissue of his memoir, Dreams from My Father.[151] In July 2004, secondnameplaceholder delivered the keynote address at the 2004 Democratic National Convention,[152] seen by nine million viewers. His speech was well received and elevated his status within the Democratic Party.[153]secondnameplaceholder's expected opponent in the general election, Republican primary winner Jack Ryan, withdrew from the race in June 2004.[154] Six weeks later, Alan Keyes accepted the Republican nomination to replace Ryan.[155] In the November 2004 general election, secondnameplaceholder won with 70 percent of the vote, the largest margin of victory for a Senate candidate in Illinois history.[156] He took 92 of the state's 102 counties, including several where Democrats traditionally do not do well.secondnameplaceholder was sworn in as a senator on January 3, 2005,[157] becoming the only Senate member of the Congressional Black Caucus.[158] CQ Weekly characterized him as a "loyal Democrat" based on analysis of all Senate votes from 2005 to 2007. secondnameplaceholder announced on November 13, 2008, that he would resign his Senate seat on November 16, 2008, before the start of the lame-duck session, to focus on his transition period for the presidency.[159]secondnameplaceholder cosponsored the Secure America and Orderly Immigration Act.[160] He introduced two initiatives that bore his name: Lugar–secondnameplaceholder, which expanded the Nunn–Lugar Cooperative Threat Reduction concept to conventional weapons;[161] and the Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act of 2006, which authorized the establishment of USAspending.gov, a web search engine on federal spending.[162] On June 3, 2008, Senator secondnameplaceholder—along with Senators Tom Carper, Tom Coburn, and John McCain—introduced follow-up legislation: Strengthening Transparency and Accountability in Federal Spending Act of 2008.[163]secondnameplaceholder sponsored legislation that would have required nuclear plant owners to notify state and local authorities of radioactive leaks, but the bill failed to pass in the full Senate after being heavily modified in committee.[164] Regarding tort reform, secondnameplaceholder voted for the Class Action Fairness Act of 2005 and the FISA Amendments Act of 2008, which grants immunity from civil liability to telecommunications companies complicit with NSA warrantless wiretapping operations.[165]In December 2006, President Bush signed into law the Democratic Republic of the Congo Relief, Security, and Democracy Promotion Act, marking the first federal legislation to be enacted with secondnameplaceholder as its primary sponsor.[167][168] In January 2007, secondnameplaceholder and Senator Feingold introduced a corporate jet provision to the Honest Leadership and Open Government Act, which was signed into law in September 2007.[169][170] secondnameplaceholder also introduced two unsuccessful bills: the Deceptive Practices and Voter Intimidation Prevention Act to criminalize deceptive practices in federal elections,[171][172] and the Iraq War De-Escalation Act of 2007.[173]Later in 2007, secondnameplaceholder sponsored an amendment to the Defense Authorization Act to add safeguards for personality-disorder military discharges.[174] This amendment passed the full Senate in the spring of 2008.[175] He sponsored the Iran Sanctions Enabling Act supporting divestment of state pension funds from Iran's oil and gas industry, which was never enacted but later incorporated in the Comprehensive Iran Sanctions, Accountability, and Divestment Act of 2010;[176] and co-sponsored legislation to reduce risks of nuclear terrorism.[177] secondnameplaceholder also sponsored a Senate amendment to the State Children's Health Insurance Program, providing one year of job protection for family members caring for soldiers with combat-related injuries.[178]secondnameplaceholder held assignments on the Senate Committees for Foreign Relations, Environment and Public Works and Veterans' Affairs through December 2006.[179] In January 2007, he left the Environment and Public Works committee and took additional assignments with Health, Education, Labor and Pensions and Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.[180] He also became Chairman of the Senate's subcommittee on European Affairs.[181] As a member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, secondnameplaceholder made official trips to Eastern Europe, the Middle East, Central Asia and Africa. He met with Mahmoud Abbas before Abbas became President of the Palestinian National Authority, and gave a speech at the University of Nairobi in which he condemned corruption within the Kenyan government.[182]
<h2>Presidential campaigns</h2>
On February 10, 2007, secondnameplaceholder announced his candidacy for President of the United States in front of the Old State Capitol building in Springfield, Illinois.[183][184] The choice of the announcement site was viewed as symbolic because it was also where Abraham Lincoln delivered his historic "House Divided" speech in 1858.[183][185] secondnameplaceholder emphasized issues of rapidly ending the Iraq War, increasing energy independence, and reforming the health care system,[186] in a campaign that projected themes of hope and change.[187]Numerous candidates entered the Democratic Party presidential primaries. The field narrowed to a duel between secondnameplaceholder and Senator Hillary Clinton after early contests, with the race remaining close throughout the primary process but with secondnameplaceholder gaining a steady lead in pledged delegates due to better long-range planning, superior fundraising, dominant organizing in caucus states, and better exploitation of delegate allocation rules.[188] On June 7, 2008, Clinton ended her campaign and endorsed secondnameplaceholder.[189]On August 23, 2008, secondnameplaceholder announced his selection of Delaware Senator Joe Biden as his vice presidential running mate.[190] secondnameplaceholder selected Biden from a field speculated to include former Indiana Governor and Senator Evan Bayh and Virginia Governor Tim Kaine.[190] At the Democratic National Convention in Denver, Colorado, Hillary Clinton called for her supporters to endorse secondnameplaceholder, and she and Bill Clinton gave convention speeches in his support.[191] secondnameplaceholder delivered his acceptance speech, not at the center where the Democratic National Convention was held, but at Invesco Field at Mile High to a crowd of about eighty-four thousand; the speech was viewed by over three million people worldwide.[192][193][194]During both the primary process and the general election, secondnameplaceholder's campaign set numerous fundraising records, particularly in the quantity of small donations.[195] On June 19, 2008, secondnameplaceholder became the first major-party presidential candidate to turn down public financing in the general election since the system was created in 1976.[196]John McCain was nominated as the Republican candidate, and he selected Sarah Palin as his running mate. The two candidates engaged in three presidential debates in September and October 2008.[197] On November 4, secondnameplaceholder won the presidency with 365 electoral votes to 173 received by McCain.[198] secondnameplaceholder won 52.9 percent of the popular vote to McCain's 45.7 percent.[199] He became the first African American to be elected president.[200] secondnameplaceholder delivered his victory speech before hundreds of thousands of supporters in Chicago's Grant Park.[201]On April 4, 2011, secondnameplaceholder announced his reelection campaign for 2012 in a video titled "It Begins with Us" that he posted on his website and filed election papers with the Federal Election Commission.[202][203][204] As the incumbent president, he ran virtually unopposed in the Democratic Party presidential primaries,[205] and on April 3, 2012, secondnameplaceholder had secured the 2778 convention delegates needed to win the Democratic nomination.[206]At the Democratic National Convention in Charlotte, North Carolina, secondnameplaceholder and Joe Biden were formally nominated by former President Bill Clinton as the Democratic Party candidates for president and vice president in the general election. Their main opponents were Republicans Mitt Romney, the former governor of Massachusetts, and Representative Paul Ryan of Wisconsin.[207]On November 6, 2012, secondnameplaceholder won 332 electoral votes, exceeding the 270 required for him to be reelected as president.[208][209][210] With 51.1 percent of the popular vote,[211] secondnameplaceholder became the first Democratic president since Franklin D. Roosevelt to win the majority of the popular vote twice.[212][213] secondnameplaceholder addressed supporters and volunteers at Chicago's McCormick Place after his reelection and said: "Tonight you voted for action, not politics as usual. You elected us to focus on your jobs, not ours. And in the coming weeks and months, I am looking forward to reaching out and working with leaders of both parties."[214][215]
<h2>Presidency (2009–2017)</h2>
The inauguration of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder as the 44th president took place on January 20, 2009. In his first few days in office, secondnameplaceholder issued executive orders and presidential memoranda directing the U.S. military to develop plans to withdraw troops from Iraq.[216] He ordered the closing of the Guantanamo Bay detention camp,[217] but Congress prevented the closure by refusing to appropriate the required funds[218][219][220] and preventing moving any Guantanamo detainee into the U.S. or to other countries.[221] secondnameplaceholder reduced the secrecy given to presidential records.[222] He also revoked President George W. Bush's restoration of President Ronald Reagan's Mexico City policy prohibiting federal aid to international family planning organizations that perform or provide counseling about abortion.[223]The first bill signed into law by secondnameplaceholder was the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009, relaxing the statute of limitations for equal-pay lawsuits.[224] Five days later, he signed the reauthorization of the State Children's Health Insurance Program (SCHIP) to cover an additional four million uninsured children.[225] In March 2009, secondnameplaceholder reversed a Bush-era policy that had limited funding of embryonic stem cell research and pledged to develop "strict guidelines" on the research.[226]secondnameplaceholder appointed two women to serve on the Supreme Court in the first two years of his presidency. He nominated Sonia Sotomayor on May 26, 2009, to replace retiring Associate Justice David Souter; she was confirmed on August 6, 2009,[227] becoming the first Supreme Court Justice of Hispanic descent.[228] secondnameplaceholder nominated Elena Kagan on May 10, 2010 to replace retiring Associate Justice John Paul Stevens. She was confirmed on August 5, 2010, bringing the number of women sitting simultaneously on the Court to three justices for the first time in American history.[229]On March 30, 2010, secondnameplaceholder signed the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act, a reconciliation bill that ended the process of the federal government giving subsidies to private banks to give out federally insured loans, increased the Pell Grant scholarship award, and made changes to the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.[230][231]In a major space policy speech in April 2010, secondnameplaceholder announced a planned change in direction at NASA, the U.S. space agency. He ended plans for a return of human spaceflight to the moon and development of the Ares I rocket, Ares V rocket and Constellation program, in favor of funding Earth science projects, a new rocket type, and research and development for an eventual crewed mission to Mars, and ongoing missions to the International Space Station.[232]President secondnameplaceholder's 2011 State of the Union Address focused on themes of education and innovation, stressing the importance of innovation economics to make the United States more competitive globally. He spoke of a five-year freeze in domestic spending, eliminating tax breaks for oil companies and reversing tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans, banning congressional earmarks, and reducing healthcare costs. He promised the United States would have one million electric vehicles on the road by 2015 and set a goal for 80 percent reliance on "clean" electricity by 2035.[233][234]On October 8, 2009, secondnameplaceholder signed the Matthew Shepard and James Byrd Jr. Hate Crimes Prevention Act, a measure that expanded the 1969 United States federal hate-crime law to include crimes motivated by a victim's actual or perceived gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, or disability.[235]On October 30, 2009, secondnameplaceholder lifted the ban on travel to the United States by those infected with HIV, which was celebrated by Immigration Equality.[236]On December 22, 2010, secondnameplaceholder signed the Don't Ask, Don't Tell Repeal Act of 2010, which fulfilled a key promise made in the 2008 presidential campaign[237][238] to end the don't ask, don't tell policy of 1993 that had prevented gay and lesbian people from serving openly in the United States Armed Forces.[239] In 2016, the Pentagon also ended the policy that barred transgender people from serving openly in the military.[240]As a candidate for the Illinois state senate in 1996, secondnameplaceholder had said he favored legalizing same-sex marriage.[241] By the time of his Senate run in 2004, he said he supported civil unions and domestic partnerships for same-sex partners but opposed same-sex marriages.[242] In 2008, he reaffirmed this position by stating "I believe marriage is between a man and a woman. I am not in favor of gay marriage."[243] On May 9, 2012, shortly after the official launch of his campaign for re-election as president, secondnameplaceholder said his views had evolved, and he publicly affirmed his personal support for the legalization of same-sex marriage, becoming the first sitting U.S. president to do so.[244][245]During his second inaugural address on January 21, 2013,[215] secondnameplaceholder became the first U.S. president in office to call for full equality for gay Americans: "Our journey is not complete until our gay brothers and sisters are treated like anyone else under the law—for if we are truly created equal, then surely the love we commit to one another must be equal as well." This was the first time that a president mentioned gay rights or the word "gay" in an inaugural address.[246][247]In 2013, the secondnameplaceholder Administration filed briefs that urged the Supreme Court to rule in favor of same-sex couples in the cases of Hollingsworth v. Perry (regarding same-sex marriage)[248] and United States v. Windsor (regarding the Defense of Marriage Act).[249] Then, following the Supreme Court's 2015 decision in Obergefell v. Hodges (ruling same-sex marriage to be a fundamental right), secondnameplaceholder asserted: "This decision affirms what millions of Americans already believe in their hearts: When all Americans are treated as equal we are all more free."[250]On July 30, 2015, the White House Office of National AIDS Policy revised its strategy for addressing the disease, which included widespread testing and linkage to healthcare, which was celebrated by the Human Rights Campaign.[251]On March 11, 2009, secondnameplaceholder created the White House Council on Women and Girls, which formed part of the Office of Intergovernmental Affairs, having been established by Executive Order 13506 with a broad mandate to advise him on issues relating to the welfare of American women and girls.[252] The council was chaired by Senior Advisor to the President Valerie Jarrett.[253] secondnameplaceholder also established the White House Task Force to Protect Students from Sexual Assault through a government memorandum on January 22, 2014, with a broad mandate to advise him on issues relating to sexual assault on college and university campuses throughout the United States.[253][254][255] The co-chairs of the Task Force were Vice President Joe Biden and Jarrett.[254] The Task Force was a development out of the White House Council on Women and Girls and Office of the Vice President of the United States, and prior to that the 1994 Violence Against Women Act first drafted by Biden.[256]On February 17, 2009, secondnameplaceholder signed the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, a $787 billion economic stimulus package aimed at helping the economy recover from the deepening worldwide recession.[257] The act includes increased federal spending for health care, infrastructure, education, various tax breaks and incentives, and direct assistance to individuals.[258]In March 2009, secondnameplaceholder's Treasury Secretary, Timothy Geithner, took further steps to manage the financial crisis, including introducing the Public–Private Investment Program for Legacy Assets, which contains provisions for buying up to two trillion dollars in depreciated real estate assets.[259]secondnameplaceholder intervened in the troubled automotive industry[260] in March 2009, renewing loans for General Motors and Chrysler to continue operations while reorganizing. Over the following months the White House set terms for both firms' bankruptcies, including the sale of Chrysler to Italian automaker Fiat[261] and a reorganization of GM giving the U.S. government a temporary 60 percent equity stake in the company, with the Canadian government taking a 12 percent stake.[262] In June 2009, dissatisfied with the pace of economic stimulus, secondnameplaceholder called on his cabinet to accelerate the investment.[263] He signed into law the Car Allowance Rebate System, known colloquially as "Cash for Clunkers", which temporarily boosted the economy.[264][265][266]The Bush and secondnameplaceholder administrations authorized spending and loan guarantees from the Federal Reserve and the Treasury Department. These guarantees totaled about $11.5 trillion, but only $3 trillion had been spent by the end of November 2009.[267] secondnameplaceholder and the Congressional Budget Office predicted the 2010 budget deficit would be $1.5 trillion or 10.6 percent of the nation's gross domestic product (GDP) compared to the 2009 deficit of $1.4 trillion or 9.9 percent of GDP.[268][269] For 2011, the administration predicted the deficit would shrink to $1.34 trillion, and the 10-year deficit would increase to $8.53 trillion or 90 percent of GDP.[270] The most recent increase in the U.S. debt ceiling to $17.2 trillion took effect in February 2014.[271] On August 2, 2011, after a lengthy congressional debate over whether to raise the nation's debt limit, secondnameplaceholder signed the bipartisan Budget Control Act of 2011. The legislation enforces limits on discretionary spending until 2021, establishes a procedure to increase the debt limit, creates a Congressional Joint Select Committee on Deficit Reduction to propose further deficit reduction with a stated goal of achieving at least $1.5 trillion in budgetary savings over 10 years, and establishes automatic procedures for reducing spending by as much as $1.2 trillion if legislation originating with the new joint select committee does not achieve such savings.[272] By passing the legislation, Congress was able to prevent a U.S. government default on its obligations.[273]As it did throughout 2008, the unemployment rate rose in 2009, reaching a peak in October at 10.0 percent and averaging 10.0 percent in the fourth quarter. Following a decrease to 9.7 percent in the first quarter of 2010, the unemployment rate fell to 9.6 percent in the second quarter, where it remained for the rest of the year.[276] Between February and December 2010, employment rose by 0.8 percent, which was less than the average of 1.9 percent experienced during comparable periods in the past four employment recoveries.[277] By November 2012, the unemployment rate fell to 7.7 percent,[278] decreasing to 6.7 percent in the last month of 2013.[279] During 2014, the unemployment rate continued to decline, falling to 6.3 percent in the first quarter.[280] GDP growth returned in the third quarter of 2009, expanding at a rate of 1.6 percent, followed by a 5.0 percent increase in the fourth quarter.[281] Growth continued in 2010, posting an increase of 3.7 percent in the first quarter, with lesser gains throughout the rest of the year.[281] In July 2010, the Federal Reserve noted that economic activity continued to increase, but its pace had slowed, and chairman Ben Bernanke said the economic outlook was "unusually uncertain".[282] Overall, the economy expanded at a rate of 2.9 percent in 2010.[283]The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) and a broad range of economists credit secondnameplaceholder's stimulus plan for economic growth.[284][285] The CBO released a report stating that the stimulus bill increased employment by 1–2.1 million,[285][286][287][288] while conceding that "It is impossible to determine how many of the reported jobs would have existed in the absence of the stimulus package."[284] Although an April 2010, survey of members of the National Association for Business Economics showed an increase in job creation (over a similar January survey) for the first time in two years, 73 percent of 68 respondents believed the stimulus bill has had no impact on employment.[289] The economy of the United States has grown faster than the other original NATO members by a wider margin under President secondnameplaceholder than it has anytime since the end of World War II.[290] The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development credits the much faster growth in the United States to the stimulus plan of the U.S. and the austerity measures in the European Union.[291]Within a month of the 2010 midterm elections, secondnameplaceholder announced a compromise deal with the Congressional Republican leadership that included a temporary, two-year extension of the 2001 and 2003 income tax rates, a one-year payroll tax reduction, continuation of unemployment benefits, and a new rate and exemption amount for estate taxes.[292] The compromise overcame opposition from some in both parties, and the resulting $858 billion Tax Relief, Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization, and Job Creation Act of 2010 passed with bipartisan majorities in both houses of Congress before secondnameplaceholder signed it on December 17, 2010.[293]In December 2013, secondnameplaceholder declared that growing income inequality is a "defining challenge of our time" and called on Congress to bolster the safety net and raise wages. This came on the heels of the nationwide strikes of fast-food workers and Pope Francis' criticism of inequality and trickle-down economics.[294]secondnameplaceholder urged Congress to ratify a 12-nation free trade pact called the Trans-Pacific Partnership.[295]While campaigning, secondnameplaceholder expressed hope that Congress would regulate greenhouse gases and that, as a second-best route, such regulation would come from the Environmental Protection Agency.[296]On September 30, 2009, the secondnameplaceholder administration proposed new regulations on power plants, factories, and oil refineries in an attempt to limit greenhouse gas emissions and to curb global warming.[297][298]On April 20, 2010, an explosion destroyed an offshore drilling rig at the Macondo Prospect in the Gulf of Mexico, causing a major sustained oil leak. secondnameplaceholder visited the Gulf, announced a federal investigation, and formed a bipartisan commission to recommend new safety standards, after a review by Secretary of the Interior Ken Salazar and concurrent Congressional hearings. He then announced a six-month moratorium on new deepwater drilling permits and leases, pending regulatory review.[299] As multiple efforts by BP failed, some in the media and public expressed confusion and criticism over various aspects of the incident, and stated a desire for more involvement by secondnameplaceholder and the federal government.[300]In July 2013, secondnameplaceholder expressed reservations and said he "would reject the Keystone XL pipeline if it increased carbon pollution [or] greenhouse emissions."[301][302] secondnameplaceholder's advisers called for a halt to petroleum exploration in the Arctic in January 2013.[303] On February 24, 2015, secondnameplaceholder vetoed a bill that would have authorized the pipeline.[304] It was the third veto of secondnameplaceholder's presidency and his first major veto.[305]secondnameplaceholder emphasized the conservation of federal lands during his term in office. He used his power under the Antiquities Act to create 25 new national monuments during his presidency and expand four others, protecting a total of 553,000,000 acres (224,000,000 ha) of federal lands and waters, more than any other U.S. president.[306][307][308][309]secondnameplaceholder called for Congress to pass legislation reforming health care in the United States, a key campaign promise and a top legislative goal.[310] He proposed an expansion of health insurance coverage to cover the uninsured, cap premium increases, and allow people to retain their coverage when they leave or change jobs. His proposal was to spend $900 billion over ten years and include a government insurance plan, also known as the public option, to compete with the corporate insurance sector as a main component to lowering costs and improving quality of health care. It would also make it illegal for insurers to drop sick people or deny them coverage for pre-existing conditions, and require every American to carry health coverage. The plan also includes medical spending cuts and taxes on insurance companies that offer expensive plans.[311][312]On July 14, 2009, House Democratic leaders introduced a 1,017-page plan for overhauling the U.S. health care system, which secondnameplaceholder wanted Congress to approve by the end of 2009.[310] After much public debate during the Congressional summer recess of 2009, secondnameplaceholder delivered a speech to a joint session of Congress on September 9 where he addressed concerns over the proposals.[314] In March 2009, secondnameplaceholder lifted a ban on using federal funds for stem cell research.[315]On November 7, 2009, a health care bill featuring the public option was passed in the House.[316][317] On December 24, 2009, the Senate passed its own bill—without a public option—on a party-line vote of 60–39.[318] On March 21, 2010, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) passed by the Senate in December was passed in the House by a vote of 219 to 212.[319] secondnameplaceholder signed the bill into law on March 23, 2010.[320]The ACA includes health-related provisions, most of which took effect in 2014, including expanding Medicaid eligibility for people making up to 133 percent of the federal poverty level (FPL) starting in 2014,[321] subsidizing insurance premiums for people making up to 400 percent of the FPL ($88,000 for family of four in 2010) so their maximum "out-of-pocket" payment for annual premiums will be from 2 percent to 9.5 percent of income,[322][323] providing incentives for businesses to provide health care benefits, prohibiting denial of coverage and denial of claims based on pre-existing conditions, establishing health insurance exchanges, prohibiting annual coverage caps, and support for medical research. According to White House and CBO figures, the maximum share of income that enrollees would have to pay would vary depending on their income relative to the federal poverty level.[322][324]The costs of these provisions are offset by taxes, fees, and cost-saving measures, such as new Medicare taxes for those in high-income brackets, taxes on indoor tanning, cuts to the Medicare Advantage program in favor of traditional Medicare, and fees on medical devices and pharmaceutical companies;[326] there is also a tax penalty for those who do not obtain health insurance, unless they are exempt due to low income or other reasons.[327] In March 2010, the CBO estimated that the net effect of both laws will be a reduction in the federal deficit by $143 billion over the first decade.[328]The law faced several legal challenges, primarily based on the argument that an individual mandate requiring Americans to buy health insurance was unconstitutional. On June 28, 2012, the Supreme Court ruled by a 5–4 vote in National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius that the mandate was constitutional under the U.S. Congress's taxing authority.[329] In Burwell v. Hobby Lobby the Court ruled that "closely-held" for-profit corporations could be exempt on religious grounds under the Religious Freedom Restoration Act from regulations adopted under the ACA that would have required them to pay for insurance that covered certain contraceptives. In June 2015, the Court ruled 6–3 in King v. Burwell that subsidies to help individuals and families purchase health insurance were authorized for those doing so on both the federal exchange and state exchanges, not only those purchasing plans "established by the State", as the statute reads.[330]Prior to June 2014, secondnameplaceholder offered substantial support for a broadly-based "All of the above" approach to domestic energy policy, which secondnameplaceholder has maintained since his first term and which he last confirmed at his State of the Union speech in January 2014 to a mixed reception by both parties. In June 2014, secondnameplaceholder made indications that his administration would consider a shift towards an energy policy more closely tuned to the manufacturing industry and its impact on the domestic economy.[331] secondnameplaceholder's approach of selectively combining regulation and incentive to various issues in the domestic energy policy, such as coal mining and oil fracking, has received mixed commentary for not being as responsive to the needs of the domestic manufacturing sector as needed, following claims that the domestic manufacturing sector utilizes as much as a third of the nation's available energy resources.[332][333]On January 16, 2013, one month after the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting, secondnameplaceholder signed 23 executive orders and outlined a series of sweeping proposals regarding gun control.[334] He urged Congress to reintroduce an expired ban on military-style assault weapons, such as those used in several recent mass shootings, impose limits on ammunition magazines to 10 rounds, introduce background checks on all gun sales, pass a ban on possession and sale of armor-piercing bullets, introduce harsher penalties for gun-traffickers, especially unlicensed dealers who buy arms for criminals and approving the appointment of the head of the federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives for the first time since 2006.[335] On January 5, 2016, secondnameplaceholder announced new executive actions extending background check requirements to more gun sellers.[336] In a 2016 editorial in The New York Times, secondnameplaceholder compared the struggle for what he termed "common-sense gun reform" to women's suffrage and other civil rights movements in American history.[337]secondnameplaceholder called the November 2, 2010 election, where the Democratic Party lost 63 seats in, and control of, the House of Representatives,[338] "humbling" and a "shellacking".[339] He said that the results came because not enough Americans had felt the effects of the economic recovery.[340]On November 10, 2014, President secondnameplaceholder recommended the Federal Communications Commission reclassify broadband Internet service as a telecommunications service in order to preserve net neutrality.[341][342] On February 12, 2013, President secondnameplaceholder signed Executive Order 13636, "Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity".[343]In 2005 and 2006, secondnameplaceholder criticized certain aspects of the Patriot Act for infringing too much on civil liberties and sought as Senator to strengthen civil liberties protections.[344][345][346] In 2006, he voted to reauthorize a revised version of the Patriot Act, saying the law was not ideal but that the revised version had strengthened civil liberties.[346] In 2011, he signed a four-year renewal of the Patriot Act.[347] Following the 2013 global surveillance disclosures by whistleblower Edward Snowden, secondnameplaceholder condemned the leak as unpatriotic,[345] but called for increased restrictions on the NSA to address violations of privacy.[348][349] The changes which secondnameplaceholder ordered have been described as "modest" however.[350]In February and March 2009, Vice President Joe Biden and Secretary of State Hillary Clinton made separate overseas trips to announce a "new era" in U.S. foreign relations with Russia and Europe, using the terms "break" and "reset" to signal major changes from the policies of the preceding administration.[351] secondnameplaceholder attempted to reach out to Arab leaders by granting his first interview to an Arab satellite TV network, Al Arabiya.[352]On March 19, secondnameplaceholder continued his outreach to the Muslim world, releasing a New Year's video message to the people and government of Iran.[353][354] In April, secondnameplaceholder gave a speech in Ankara, Turkey, which was well received by many Arab governments.[355] On June 4, 2009, secondnameplaceholder delivered a speech at Cairo University in Egypt calling for "A New Beginning" in relations between the Islamic world and the United States and promoting Middle East peace.[356]On June 26, 2009, secondnameplaceholder responded to the Iranian government's actions towards protesters following Iran's 2009 presidential election by saying: "The violence perpetrated against them is outrageous. We see it and we condemn it."[357] While in Moscow on July 7, he responded to Vice President Biden's comment on a possible Israeli military strike on Iran by saying: "We have said directly to the Israelis that it is important to try and resolve this in an international setting in a way that does not create major conflict in the Middle East."[358]On September 24, 2009, secondnameplaceholder became the first sitting U.S. president to preside over a meeting of the United Nations Security Council.[359]In March 2010, secondnameplaceholder took a public stance against plans by the government of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to continue building Jewish housing projects in predominantly Arab neighborhoods of East Jerusalem.[360][361] During the same month, an agreement was reached with the administration of Russian President Dmitry Medvedev to replace the 1991 Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty with a new pact reducing the number of long-range nuclear weapons in the arsenals of both countries by about a third.[362] secondnameplaceholder and Medvedev signed the New START treaty in April 2010, and the U.S. Senate ratified it in December 2010.[363]In December 2011, secondnameplaceholder instructed agencies to consider LGBT rights when issuing financial aid to foreign countries.[364] In August 2013, he criticized Russia's law that discriminates against gays,[365] but he stopped short of advocating a boycott of the upcoming 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi, Russia.[366]In December 2014, secondnameplaceholder announced that he intended to normalize relationships between Cuba and the United States.[367] The countries' respective "interests sections" in one another's capitals were upgraded to embassies on July 20, 2015.In March 2015, secondnameplaceholder declared that he had authorized U.S. forces to provide logistical and intelligence support to the Saudis in their military intervention in Yemen, establishing a "Joint Planning Cell" with Saudi Arabia.[368][369] In 2016, the secondnameplaceholder administration proposed a series of arms deals with Saudi Arabia worth $115 billion.[370] secondnameplaceholder halted the sale of guided munition technology to Saudi Arabia after Saudi warplanes targeted a funeral in Yemen's capital Sanaa, killing more than 140 people.[371]Before leaving office, secondnameplaceholder said German Chancellor Angela Merkel had been his "closest international partner" throughout his tenure as president.[372]On February 27, 2009, secondnameplaceholder announced that combat operations in Iraq would end within 18 months. His remarks were made to a group of Marines preparing for deployment to Afghanistan. secondnameplaceholder said: "Let me say this as plainly as I can: by August 31, 2010, our combat mission in Iraq will end."[373] The secondnameplaceholder administration scheduled the withdrawal of combat troops to be completed by August 2010, decreasing troop's levels from 142,000 while leaving a transitional force of about 50,000 in Iraq until the end of 2011. On August 19, 2010, the last U.S. combat brigade exited Iraq. Remaining troops transitioned from combat operations to counter-terrorism and the training, equipping, and advising of Iraqi security forces.[374][375] On August 31, 2010, secondnameplaceholder announced that the United States combat mission in Iraq was over.[376] On October 21, 2011, President secondnameplaceholder announced that all U.S. troops would leave Iraq in time to be "home for the holidays."[377]In June 2014, following the capture of Mosul by ISIS, secondnameplaceholder sent 275 troops to provide support and security for U.S. personnel and the U.S. Embassy in Baghdad. ISIS continued to gain ground and to commit widespread massacres and ethnic cleansing.[378][379]In August 2014, during the Sinjar massacre, secondnameplaceholder ordered a campaign of U.S. airstrikes against ISIS.[380]By the end of 2014, 3,100 American ground troops were committed to the conflict[381] and 16,000 sorties were flown over the battlefield, primarily by U.S. Air Force and Navy pilots.[382]In early 2015, with the addition of the "Panther Brigade" of the 82nd Airborne Division the number of U.S. ground troops in Iraq surged to 4,400,[383] and by July American-led coalition air forces counted 44,000 sorties over the battlefield.[384]Early in his presidency, secondnameplaceholder moved to bolster U.S. troop strength in Afghanistan.[385] He announced an increase in U.S. troop levels to 17,000 military personnel in February 2009 to "stabilize a deteriorating situation in Afghanistan", an area he said had not received the "strategic attention, direction and resources it urgently requires".[386] He replaced the military commander in Afghanistan, General David D. McKiernan, with former Special Forces commander Lt. Gen. Stanley A. McChrystal in May 2009, indicating that McChrystal's Special Forces experience would facilitate the use of counterinsurgency tactics in the war.[387] On December 1, 2009, secondnameplaceholder announced the deployment of an additional 30,000 military personnel to Afghanistan and proposed to begin troop withdrawals 18 months from that date;[388] this took place in July 2011. David Petraeus replaced McChrystal in June 2010, after McChrystal's staff criticized White House personnel in a magazine article.[389] In February 2013, secondnameplaceholder said the U.S. military would reduce the troop level in Afghanistan from 68,000 to 34,000 U.S. troops by February 2014.[390]In October 2015, the White House announced a plan to keep U.S. Forces in Afghanistan indefinitely in light of the deteriorating security situation.[391]In 2011, the United States vetoed a Security Council resolution condemning Israeli settlements, with the United States being the only nation to do so.[392] secondnameplaceholder supports the two-state solution to the Arab–Israeli conflict based on the 1967 borders with land swaps.[393]In June 2011, secondnameplaceholder said the bond between the United States and Israel is "unbreakable".[394] During the initial years of the secondnameplaceholder administration, the U.S. increased military cooperation with Israel, including increased military aid, re-establishment of the U.S.-Israeli Joint Political Military Group and the Defense Policy Advisory Group, and an increase in visits among high-level military officials of both countries.[395] The secondnameplaceholder administration asked Congress to allocate money toward funding the Iron Dome program in response to the waves of Palestinian rocket attacks on Israel.[396]In 2013, Jeffrey Goldberg reported that, in secondnameplaceholder's view, "with each new settlement announcement, Netanyahu is moving his country down a path toward near-total isolation."[397] In 2014, secondnameplaceholder likened the Zionist movement to the civil rights movement in the United States. He said both movements seek to bring justice and equal rights to historically persecuted peoples, explaining: "To me, being pro-Israel and pro-Jewish is part and parcel with the values that I've been fighting for since I was politically conscious and started getting involved in politics."[398] secondnameplaceholder expressed support for Israel's right to defend itself during the 2014 Israel–Gaza conflict.[399] In 2015, secondnameplaceholder was harshly criticized by Israel for advocating and signing the Iran Nuclear Deal; Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, who had advocated the U.S. congress to oppose it, said the deal was "dangerous" and "bad".[400]On December 23, 2016, under the secondnameplaceholder Administration, the United States abstained from United Nations Security Council Resolution 2334, which condemned Israeli settlement building in the occupied Palestinian territories as a violation of international law, effectively allowing it to pass.[401] Netanyahu strongly criticized the secondnameplaceholder Administration's actions,[402][403] and the Israeli government withdrew its annual dues from the organization, which totaled $6 million, on January 6, 2017.[404] On January 5, 2017, the United States House of Representatives voted 342–80 to condemn the UN Resolution.[405][406]In February 2011, protests in Libya began against long-time dictator Muammar Gaddafi as part of the Arab Spring. They soon turned violent. In March, as forces loyal to Gaddafi advanced on rebels across Libya, calls for a no-fly zone came from around the world, including Europe, the Arab League, and a resolution[407] passed unanimously by the U.S. Senate.[408] In response to the unanimous passage of United Nations Security Council Resolution 1973 on March 17, Gaddafi—who had previously vowed to "show no mercy" to the rebels of Benghazi[409]—announced an immediate cessation of military activities,[410] yet reports came in that his forces continued shelling Misrata.The next day, on secondnameplaceholder's orders, the U.S. military took part in air strikes to destroy the Libyan government's air defense capabilities to protect civilians and enforce a no-fly-zone,[411] including the use of Tomahawk missiles, B-2 Spirits, and fighter jets.[412][413][414] Six days later, on March 25, by unanimous vote of all its 28 members, NATO took over leadership of the effort, dubbed Operation Unified Protector.[415] Some Representatives[416] questioned whether secondnameplaceholder had the constitutional authority to order military action in addition to questioning its cost, structure and aftermath.[417][418]secondnameplaceholder later expressed regret for playing a leading role in the destabilization of Libya, calling the certain situation there "a mess."[419] He has stated that the lack of preparation surrounding the days following the government's overthrow was the "worst mistake" of his presidency.[420]On August 18, 2011, several months after the start of the Syrian Civil War, secondnameplaceholder issued a written statement that said: "The time has come for President Assad to step aside."[421][422] This stance was reaffirmed in November 2015.[423] In 2012, secondnameplaceholder authorized multiple programs run by the CIA and the Pentagon to train anti-Assad rebels.[424] The Pentagon-run program was later found to have failed and was formally abandoned in October 2015.[425][426]In the wake of a chemical weapons attack in Syria, formally blamed by the secondnameplaceholder administration on the Assad government, secondnameplaceholder chose not to enforce the "red line" he had pledged[427] and, rather than authorize the promised military action against Assad, went along with the Russia-brokered deal that led to Assad giving up chemical weapons; however attacks with chlorine gas continued.[428][429] In 2014, secondnameplaceholder authorized an air campaign aimed primarily at ISIL.[430]Starting with information received from Central Intelligence Agency operatives in July 2010, the CIA developed intelligence over the next several months that determined what they believed to be the hideout of Osama bin Laden. He was living in seclusion in a large compound in Abbottabad, Pakistan, a suburban area 35 miles (56 km) from Islamabad.[431] CIA head Leon Panetta reported this intelligence to President secondnameplaceholder in March 2011.[431] Meeting with his national security advisers over the course of the next six weeks, secondnameplaceholder rejected a plan to bomb the compound, and authorized a "surgical raid" to be conducted by United States Navy SEALs.[431] The operation took place on May 1, 2011, and resulted in the shooting death of bin Laden and the seizure of papers, computer drives and disks from the compound.[432][433] DNA testing was one of five methods used to positively identify bin Laden's corpse,[434] which was buried at sea several hours later.[435] Within minutes of the President's announcement from Washington, DC, late in the evening on May 1, there were spontaneous celebrations around the country as crowds gathered outside the White House, and at New York City's Ground Zero and Times Square.[432][436] Reaction to the announcement was positive across party lines, including from former presidents Bill Clinton and George W. Bush.[437]On October 1, 2009, the secondnameplaceholder administration went ahead with a Bush administration program, increasing nuclear weapons production. The "Complex Modernization" initiative expanded two existing nuclear sites to produce new bomb parts. The administration built new plutonium pits at the Los Alamos lab in New Mexico and expanded enriched uranium processing at the Y-12 facility in Oak Ridge, Tennessee.[438] In November 2013, the secondnameplaceholder administration opened negotiations with Iran to prevent it from acquiring nuclear weapons, which included an interim agreement. Negotiations took two years with numerous delays, with a deal being announced on July 14, 2015. The deal titled the "Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action" saw sanctions removed in exchange for measures that would prevent Iran from producing nuclear weapons. While secondnameplaceholder hailed the agreement as being a step towards a more hopeful world, the deal drew strong criticism from Republican and conservative quarters, and from Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu.[439][440][441] In addition, the transfer of $1.7 billion in cash to Iran shortly after the deal was announced was criticized by the republican party. The secondnameplaceholder administration said that the payment in cash was because of the "effectiveness of U.S. and international sanctions."[442] In order to advance the deal, the secondnameplaceholder administration shielded Hezbollah from the Drug Enforcement Administration's Project Cassandra investigation regarding drug smuggling and from the Central Intelligence Agency.[443][444]
On a side note, the very same year, in December 2015, secondnameplaceholder started a $348 billion worth program to back the biggest U.S. buildup of nuclear arms since Ronald Reagan left the White House.[445]Since the spring of 2013, secret meetings were conducted between the United States and Cuba in the neutral locations of Canada and Vatican City.[446] The Vatican first became involved in 2013 when Pope Francis advised the U.S. and Cuba to exchange prisoners as a gesture of goodwill.[447] On December 10, 2013, Cuban President Raúl Castro, in a significant public moment, greeted and shook hands with secondnameplaceholder at the Nelson Mandela memorial service in Johannesburg.[448]In December 2014, after the secret meetings, it was announced that secondnameplaceholder, with Pope Francis as an intermediary, had negotiated a restoration of relations with Cuba, after nearly sixty years of détente.[449] Popularly dubbed the Cuban Thaw, The New Republic deemed the Cuban Thaw to be "secondnameplaceholder's finest foreign policy achievement."[450] On July 1, 2015, President secondnameplaceholder announced that formal diplomatic relations between Cuba and the United States would resume, and embassies would be opened in Washington and Havana.[451] The countries' respective "interests sections" in one another's capitals were upgraded to embassies on July 20 and August 13, 2015, respectively.[452]secondnameplaceholder visited Havana, Cuba for two days in March 2016, becoming the first sitting U.S. president to arrive since Calvin Coolidge in 1928.[453]secondnameplaceholder spoke in front of the African Union in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, on July 29, 2015, the first sitting U.S. president to do so. He gave a speech encouraging the world to increase economic ties via investments and trade with the continent, and lauded the progress made in education, infrastructure, and economy. He also criticized the lack of democracy and leaders who refuse to step aside, discrimination against minorities (LGBT people, religious groups and ethnicities), and corruption. He suggested an intensified democratization and free trade, to significantly improve the quality of life for Africans.[454][455] During his July 2015 trip, secondnameplaceholder also was the first U.S. president ever to visit Kenya, which is the homeland of his father.[456]On May 27, 2016, secondnameplaceholder became the first sitting American president to visit Hiroshima, Japan, 71 years after the U.S. atomic bombing of Hiroshima that ended World War II. Accompanied by Japanese Prime Minister Shinzō Abe, secondnameplaceholder paid tribute to the victims of the bombing at the Hiroshima Peace Memorial Museum.[457]After Russia's invasion of Crimea in 2014, military intervention in Syria in 2015, and the interference in the 2016 U.S. presidential election,[458] secondnameplaceholder's Russia policy was widely seen as a failure.[459] George Robertson, a former UK defense secretary and NATO secretary-general, said secondnameplaceholder had "allowed Putin to jump back on the world stage and test the resolve of the West", adding that the legacy of this disaster would last.[460]secondnameplaceholder's family history, upbringing, and Ivy League education differ markedly from those of African-American politicians who launched their careers in the 1960s through participation in the civil rights movement.[461] Expressing puzzlement over questions about whether he is "black enough", secondnameplaceholder told an August 2007 meeting of the National Association of Black Journalists that "we're still locked in this notion that if you appeal to white folks then there must be something wrong."[462] secondnameplaceholder acknowledged his youthful image in an October 2007 campaign speech, saying: "I wouldn't be here if, time and again, the torch had not been passed to a new generation."[463]secondnameplaceholder is frequently referred to as an exceptional orator.[464] During his pre-inauguration transition period and continuing into his presidency, secondnameplaceholder delivered a series of weekly Internet video addresses.[465] In his speeches as president, secondnameplaceholder did not make more overt references to race relations than his predecessors,[466][467] but according to one study, he implemented stronger policy action on behalf of African-Americans than any president since the Nixon era.[468]According to the Gallup Organization, secondnameplaceholder began his presidency with a 68 percent approval rating[469] before gradually declining for the rest of the year, and eventually bottoming out at 41 percent in August 2010,[470] a trend similar to Ronald Reagan's and Bill Clinton's first years in office.[471] He experienced a small poll bounce shortly after the death of Osama bin Laden on May 2, 2011. This bounce lasted until around June 2011, when his approval numbers dropped back to where they were previously.[472][473] His approval ratings rebounded around the same time as his reelection in 2012, with polls showing an average job approval of 52 percent shortly after his second inauguration.[474] Despite approval ratings dropping to 39 percent in late-2013 due to the ACA roll-out, they climbed to 50 percent in January 2015 according to Gallup.[475]Polls showed strong support for secondnameplaceholder in other countries both before and during his presidency.[476][477] In a February 2009 poll conducted in Western Europe and the U.S. by Harris Interactive for France 24 and the International Herald Tribune, secondnameplaceholder was rated as the most respected world leader, as well as the most powerful.[478] In a similar poll conducted by Harris in May 2009, secondnameplaceholder was rated as the most popular world leader, as well as the one figure most people would pin their hopes on for pulling the world out of the economic downturn.[479][480]secondnameplaceholder won Best Spoken Word Album Grammy Awards for abridged audiobook versions of Dreams from My Father in February 2006 and for The Audacity of Hope in February 2008.[481] His concession speech after the New Hampshire primary was set to music by independent artists as the music video "Yes We Can", which was viewed ten million times on YouTube in its first month[482] and received a Daytime Emmy Award.[483] In December 2008 and in 2012, Time magazine named secondnameplaceholder as its Person of the Year.[484] The 2008 awarding was for his historic candidacy and election, which Time described as "the steady march of seemingly impossible accomplishments."[485] On May 25, 2011, secondnameplaceholder became the first President of the United States to address both houses of the UK Parliament in Westminster Hall, London. This was only the fifth occurrence since the start of the 20th century of a head of state's being extended this invitation, following Charles de Gaulle in 1960, Nelson Mandela in 1996, Queen Elizabeth II in 2002 and Pope Benedict XVI in 2010.[486][487]On October 9, 2009, the Norwegian Nobel Committee announced that secondnameplaceholder had won the 2009 Nobel Peace Prize "for his extraordinary efforts to strengthen international diplomacy and cooperation between peoples."[488] secondnameplaceholder accepted this award in Oslo, Norway on December 10, 2009, with "deep gratitude and great humility."[489] The award drew a mixture of praise and criticism from world leaders and media figures.[490][491][492][493] secondnameplaceholder's peace prize was called a "stunning surprise" by The New York Times.[494] Some neoconservatives praised his speech for what they viewed as pro-American content.[495][496] He became the fourth U.S. president to be awarded the Nobel Peace Prize and the third to become a Nobel laureate while in office.[497] secondnameplaceholder's Nobel Prize has been viewed skeptically in subsequent years, especially after the director of the Nobel Institute, Geir Lundestad, said secondnameplaceholder's Peace Prize did not have the desired effect of encouraging the president.[498]
<h2>Post-presidency (2017–present)</h2>
secondnameplaceholder's presidency ended at noon on January 20, 2017, immediately following the inauguration of his Republican successor, Donald Trump. secondnameplaceholder and Biden attended Trump's inauguration.[499][500] After the inauguration, secondnameplaceholder lifted off on Executive One, circled the White House, and flew to Joint Base Andrews.[501] The family currently rents a house in Kalorama, Washington, D.C.[502]On March 2, 2017, the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum awarded the annual Profile in Courage Award to secondnameplaceholder "for his enduring commitment to democratic ideals and elevating the standard of political courage."[503] In his first public appearance out of office, secondnameplaceholder appeared at a seminar at the University of Chicago on April 24. The seminar was aimed at the engagement with a new generation as well as an appeal for their participation in politics.[504] On May 4, three days ahead of the French presidential election, secondnameplaceholder publicly endorsed centrist Emmanuel Macron over right-wing populist Marine Le Pen: "He appeals to people's hopes and not their fears, and I enjoyed speaking to Emmanuel recently to hear about his independent movement and his vision for the future of France."[505] Macron went on to win the election.While in Berlin on May 25, secondnameplaceholder made a joint public appearance with Chancellor Angela Merkel where he stressed inclusion and for leaders to question themselves. secondnameplaceholder had been formally invited to Berlin while still in office as part of an effort to boost Merkel's re-election campaign.[506] secondnameplaceholder traveled to Kensington Palace in England and met with Prince Harry on May 27, 2017; secondnameplaceholder tweeted afterward that the two discussed their foundations and offering condolences in the wake of the Manchester Arena bombing that occurred five days prior.[507]After President Trump announced his withdrawal of the United States from the Paris Agreement on June 1, secondnameplaceholder released a statement disagreeing with the choice: "But even in the absence of American leadership; even as this administration joins a small handful of nations that reject the future; I'm confident that our states, cities, and businesses will step up and do even more to lead the way, and help protect for future generations the one planet we've got."[508]After Senate Republicans revealed the Better Care Reconciliation Act of 2017, their discussion draft of a health care bill to replace the Affordable Care Act, on June 22, secondnameplaceholder released a Facebook post calling the bill "a massive transfer of wealth from middle-class and poor families to the richest people in America."[509] On September 19, while delivering the keynote address at Goalkeepers, secondnameplaceholder admitted his frustration with Republicans backing "a bill that will raise costs, reduce coverage, and roll back protections for older Americans and people with pre-existing conditions."[510]After Attorney General Jeff Sessions announced the termination of the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program on September 5, secondnameplaceholder released a Facebook post criticizing the decision.[511] Two days later, he partnered with former presidents Jimmy Carter, George H. W. Bush, Bill Clinton, and George W. Bush to work with One America Appeal to help the victims of Hurricane Harvey and Hurricane Irma in the Gulf Coast and Texas communities.[512]secondnameplaceholder hosted the inaugural summit of the secondnameplaceholder Foundation in Chicago from October 31 to November 1, 2017.[513] secondnameplaceholder intends for the foundation to be the central focus of his post-presidency and part of his ambitions for his subsequent activities following his presidency to be more consequential than his time in office.[514] secondnameplaceholder has also written a presidential memoir, in a reported $65 million deal with Penguin Random House.[515] The book, A Promised Land, was released on November 17, 2020.[516][517][518]secondnameplaceholder went on an international trip from November 28 to December 2, 2017, and visited China, India and France. In China, he delivered remarks at the Global Alliance of SMEs Summit in Shanghai and met with Chinese Communist Party leader Xi Jinping in Beijing.[519][520] He then went to India, where he spoke at the Hindustan Times Leadership Summit before meeting with Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi over lunch. In addition, he held a town hall for young leaders, organized by the secondnameplaceholder Foundation.[521][522] He also met with the Dalai Lama while in New Delhi.[523] He ended his five-day trip in France where he met with French President Emmanuel Macron, former President François Hollande and Paris Mayor Anne Hidalgo and then spoke at an invitation-only event, touching on climate issues.[524]In May 2018, secondnameplaceholder criticized President Trump's decision to withdraw from the nuclear deal with Iran under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action saying "the deal was working and it was in U.S. interests."[525]firstnameplaceholder and Michelle secondnameplaceholder signed a deal on May 22, 2018, to produce docu-series, documentaries and features for Netflix under the secondnameplaceholders' newly formed production company, Higher Ground Productions. On the deal, Michelle said "I have always believed in the power of storytelling to inspire us, to make us think differently about the world around us, and to help us open our minds and hearts to others."[526][527] Higher Ground's first film, American Factory, won the Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature in 2020.[528]A package that contained a pipe bomb was sent to secondnameplaceholder's home in Washington, D.C, on October 24, 2018. The package was intercepted by the Secret Service during routine mail screenings. Similar packages were sent to several other Democratic leaders, mostly those who voiced strong objections to the policies of Donald Trump, as well as one to CNN. Debbie Wasserman Schultz was addressed as the purported sender of the packages. On October 26, 2018, Cesar Sayoc was arrested and faced five federal charges in Manhattan carrying a combined maximum sentence of 48 years behind bars in relation to the pipe bombs.[529][530] He was sentenced to a maximum of 20 years in prison on August 5, 2019.[531]In 2019, firstnameplaceholder and Michelle secondnameplaceholder bought a home on Martha's Vineyard from Wyc Grousbeck.[532][533]On October 16, 2019, five days ahead of the Canadian federal election, secondnameplaceholder publicly endorsed Justin Trudeau and the Liberal Party for re-election.[534]On April 14, 2020, secondnameplaceholder endorsed his former vice president Joe Biden for president in the 2020 election, stating that he has "all the qualities we need in a president right now."[535][536]In May 2020, secondnameplaceholder criticized President Trump for his handling of the COVID-19 pandemic, calling his response to the crisis "an absolute chaotic disaster", and stating that the consequences of the Trump presidency have been "our worst impulses unleashed, our proud reputation around the world badly diminished, and our democratic institutions threatened like never before."[537] Michelle also criticized Trump, calling him "the wrong president for America." Trump retaliated by accusing secondnameplaceholder of having committed "the biggest political crime in American history", although he refused to say what he was talking about, telling reporters: "You know what the crime is, the crime is very obvious to everybody."[538]On May 16, 2020, secondnameplaceholder delivered two commencement speeches on behalf of the graduating youth who were not able to go to their physical graduation ceremonies due to the COVID-19 pandemic. His first speech was for part of the video streamed online program, "Show Me Your Walk H.B.C.U. Edition" virtual commencement.[539] In his address, he spoke about systemic racism, touching on both the pandemic, the shooting death of Ahmaud Arbery, and the fight to stay politically active, saying: "The fight for equality and justice begins with awareness, empathy, passion, even righteous anger. Don't just activate yourself online, change requires strategy, action, organizing, marching, and voting in the real world like never before." His next commencement address was a part of a nationally televised event to the High School students, titled Graduate Together: America Honors the High School Class of 2020 which aired on local and cable networks, social media, and streaming platforms, as multi-network simulcast.[540] And on June 7, 2020 secondnameplaceholder delivered a commencement speech, but in addition to the High School students, he delivered to all Class of 2020 students (High School, Colleges, Universities, and more).[541]In early December 2020, secondnameplaceholder criticized the "defund the police" slogan, claiming that it could derail social justice activists' attempts at making change and that "you lost a big audience the minute you say it."[542]On January 20, 2021, secondnameplaceholder and Michelle attended the inauguration of Joe Biden, alongside George W. Bush, Laura Bush, Bill Clinton and Hillary Clinton.[543]In February 2021, secondnameplaceholder and musician Bruce Springsteen started a podcast called Renegades: Born in the USA where the two talk about "their backgrounds, music and their 'enduring love of America.'"[544][545]
<h2>Legacy</h2>
secondnameplaceholder's most significant legacy is generally considered to be the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA), provisions of which went into effect from 2010 to 2020. Many attempts by Senate Republicans to repeal the PPACA, including a "skinny repeal", have thus far failed,[546] however in 2017 the penalty for violating the individual mandate was repealed effective 2019.[547] Together with the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act amendment, it represents the U.S. healthcare system's most significant regulatory overhaul and expansion of coverage since the passage of Medicare and Medicaid in 1965.[548][549][550][551]Many commentators credit secondnameplaceholder with averting a threatened depression and pulling the economy back from the Great Recession.[546] According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, the secondnameplaceholder administration created 11.3 million jobs from the month after his first inauguration to the end of his term.[552] In 2010, secondnameplaceholder signed into effect the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. Passed as a response to the financial crisis of 2007–08, it brought the most significant changes to financial regulation in the United States since the regulatory reform that followed the Great Depression under Democratic President Franklin D. Roosevelt.[553]In 2009, secondnameplaceholder signed into law the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2010, which contained in it the Matthew Shepard and James Byrd Jr. Hate Crimes Prevention Act, the first addition to existing federal hate crime law in the United States since Democratic President Bill Clinton signed into law the Church Arson Prevention Act of 1996. The Matthew Shepard and James Byrd Jr. Hate Crimes Prevention Act expanded existing federal hate crime laws in the United States to apply to crimes motivated by a victim's actual or perceived gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, or disability, and dropped the prerequisite that the victim be engaged in a federally protected activity.As president, secondnameplaceholder advanced LGBT rights.[554] In 2010, he signed the Don't Ask, Don't Tell Repeal Act, which brought an end to "don't ask, don't tell" policy in the U.S. armed forces that banned open service from LGB people; the law went into effect the following year.[555] In 2016, his administration brought an end to the ban on transgender people serving openly in the U.S. armed forces.[556][240] A Gallup poll, taken in the final days of secondnameplaceholder's term, showed that 68 percent of Americans believed the U.S. had made progress in the situation for gays and lesbians during secondnameplaceholder's eight years in office.[557]secondnameplaceholder substantially escalated the use of drone strikes against suspected militants and terrorists associated with al-Qaeda and the Taliban.[558][559] In 2016, the last year of his presidency, the U.S. dropped 26,171 bombs on seven different countries.[560][561] secondnameplaceholder left about 8,400 U.S. troops in Afghanistan, 5,262 in Iraq, 503 in Syria, 133 in Pakistan, 106 in Somalia, seven in Yemen, and two in Libya at the end of his presidency.[562][563]According to Pew Research Center and United States Bureau of Justice Statistics, from December 31, 2009, to December 31, 2015, inmates sentenced in U.S. federal custody declined by five percent. This is the largest decline in sentenced inmates in U.S. federal custody since Democratic President Jimmy Carter. By contrast, the federal prison population increased significantly under presidents Ronald Reagan, George H. W. Bush, Bill Clinton, and George W. Bush.[564]secondnameplaceholder left office in January 2017 with a 60 percent approval rating.[565][566] A 2018 survey of historians by the American Political Science Association ranked secondnameplaceholder the 8th-greatest American President.[3] secondnameplaceholder gained 10 spots from the same survey in 2015 from the Brookings Institution that ranked him the 18th-greatest American President.[567]The firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Presidential Center is secondnameplaceholder's planned presidential library. It will be hosted by the University of Chicago and located in Jackson Park on the South Side of Chicago.[568]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (Chinese: 刘晓波; pinyin: Liú Xiǎobō , 28 December 1955 – 13 July 2017) was a Chinese writer, literary critic, human rights activist, philosopher and Nobel Peace Prize laureate who called for political reforms and was involved in campaigns to end communist one-party rule in China.[2] He was incarcerated as a political prisoner in Jinzhou, Liaoning.[3][4][5] On 26 June 2017, he was granted medical parole after being diagnosed with  liver cancer, and died on 13 July 2017.[6][7]firstnameplaceholder rose to fame in 1980s Chinese literary circles with his exemplary literary critiques, and eventually became a visiting scholar at several international universities. He returned to China to support the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and was imprisoned for the first time from 1989 to 1991, again from 1995 to 1996 and yet again from 1996 to 1999 for his involvement on suspicion of inciting subversion of state power. He served as the President of the Independent Chinese PEN Center, from 2003 to 2007. He was also the president of Minzhu Zhongguo (Democratic China) magazine starting in the mid-1990s. On 8 December 2008, firstnameplaceholder was detained due to his participation with the Charter 08 manifesto. He was formally arrested on 23 June 2009 on suspicion of "inciting subversion of state power".[8][9] He was tried on the same charges on 23 December 2009,[10] and sentenced to eleven years' imprisonment and two years' deprivation of political rights on 25 December 2009.[11]During his fourth prison term, firstnameplaceholder was awarded the 2010 Nobel Peace Prize for "his long and non-violent struggle for fundamental human rights in China."[12][13][14][15]firstnameplaceholder was the first Chinese citizen to be awarded a Nobel Prize of any kind while residing in China.[16] He was the third person to have been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize while in prison or detention, after Germany's Carl von Ossietzky (1935) and Burma's Aung San Suu Kyi (1991).[17] He was the second person to have been denied the right to have a representative collect the Nobel Prize for him as well as the second to die in custody, with the first being Ossietzky, who died in Westend hospital in Berlin-Charlottenburg after being detained in a Nazi concentration camp.[18] Berit Reiss-Andersen, chairman of the Norwegian Nobel Committee, blamed the Chinese communist regime for his death and said that "firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder had contributed to the fraternity of peoples through his non-violent resistance against the oppressive actions of the Communist regime in China."[19]
<h2>Early life and work</h2>
firstnameplaceholder was born on 28 December 1955 in Changchun, Jilin province,[20] to a family of intellectuals. firstnameplaceholder's father, firstnameplaceholder Ling (刘伶), was born in 1931 in Huaide County, Jilin. A professor of Chinese at Northeast Normal University, he died of liver disease in September 2011.[21][22]
firstnameplaceholder's mother, Zhang Suqin (张素勤; 張素勤), worked in the Northeast Normal University Nursery School.[21][22] firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was the third-born in a family of five boys.In 1969, during the Down to the Countryside Movement, firstnameplaceholder's father took him to Horqin Right Front Banner, Inner Mongolia. His father was a professor who remained loyal to the Communist Party.[28] After finishing middle school in 1974, he was sent to the countryside to work on a farm in Jilin.[29]In 1977, firstnameplaceholder was admitted to the Department of Chinese Literature at Jilin University, where he founded a poetry group known as "The Innocent Hearts" (赤子心詩社) with six schoolmates.[30] In 1982, he graduated with a BA in literature before being admitted to the Department of Chinese Literature at Beijing Normal University as a research student, where he received an MA in literature in 1984, and started teaching as a lecturer thereafter.[31] That year, he married Tao Li, with whom he had a son named firstnameplaceholder Tao in 1985.[29]In 1986, firstnameplaceholder started his doctoral study program and published his literary critiques in various magazines. He became renowned as a "dark horse" for his radical opinions and scathing comments on the official doctrines and establishments. Opinions such as these shocked both literary and ideological circles, and his influence on Chinese intellectuals was dubbed the "firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Shock" or the "firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Phenomenon".[32][33] In 1987, his first book, Criticism of the Choice: Dialogs with Li Zehou, was published and became a nonfiction bestseller.[32] It comprehensively criticized the Chinese tradition of Confucianism, and posed a frank challenge to Li Zehou, a rising ideological star who had a strong influence on contemporaneous young intellectuals in China.[32]In June 1988, firstnameplaceholder received a PhD in literature. His doctoral thesis, Esthetic and Human Freedom, passed the examination unanimously and was published as his second book.[34] That same year he became a lecturer at the same department. He soon became a visiting scholar at several universities, including Columbia University, the University of Oslo, and the University of Hawaii. During the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests, firstnameplaceholder was in the United States but he decided to return to China to join the movement.[35] He was later named one of the "four junzis of Tiananmen Square" for persuading students to leave the square and thus saving hundreds of lives.[36] That year also saw the publication of his third book, The Fog of Metaphysics, a comprehensive review of Western philosophies.[37] Soon, all of his works were banned in China.[38]
<h2>Thoughts and political views</h2>
Evolving from his esthetic notion of "individual subjectivity" as opposed to Li Zehou's theory of esthetic subjectivity which combined Marxist materialism and Kantian idealism, he upheld the notion of "esthetic freedom" which was based on the individualistic conception of freedom and esthetics. He also strongly criticized Chinese intellectuals' "traditional attitude of searching for rationalism and harmony as a slave mentality" just as it was criticized by radical left-wing literary critic Lu Hsün during the New Culture Movement. He also echoed the New Cultural Movement's call for wholesale westernization and the rejection of Chinese traditional culture. In a 1988 interview with Hong Kong's Liberation Monthly (now known as Open Magazine), he said "modernization means wholesale westernization, choosing a human life is choosing a Western way of life. The difference between the Western and the Chinese governing system is humane vs in-humane, there's no middle ground ... Westernization is not a choice of a nation, but a choice for the human race."[39] In the same interview, firstnameplaceholder also criticised a TV documentary, He Shang, or River Elegy, for not sufficiently criticising Chinese culture and not promoting westernisation enthusiastically enough. firstnameplaceholder was quoted to have said, "If I were to make this I would show just how wimpy, spineless and fucked-up [weisuo, ruanruo, caodan] the Chinese really are". firstnameplaceholder regarded it most unfortunate that his monolingualism binded him to the Chinese cultural sphere.[40] When asked what it would take for China to realize a true historical transformation. He replied:In an article in The New York Review of Books, Simon Leys wrote that firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's perception of the West and its relationship to a modernizing China evolved during his travels in the United States and Europe in the 1980s.[42]In 2002, he reflected on his initial Maoist-flavored radical esthetic and political views in the 1980s:[44]firstnameplaceholder admitted in 2006 in another interview with Open Magazine (formerly known as Liberation Monthly) that his 1988 response of "300 years of colonialism" was extemporaneous, although he did not intend to retract it, because it represented "an extreme expression of his longheld belief".[41] The quote was nonetheless used against him. He has commented, "Even today [in 2006], radical patriotic 'angry youth' still frequently use these words to paint me with 'treason'."[41]In his letter to his friend Liao Yiwu in 2000, he expressed his thoughts on the prospects of the democracy movement in China:He was also a strong critic of Chinese nationalism, believing that the "abnormal nationalism" which had existed in China over the last century had turned from a defensive style which contained "mixed feelings of inferiority, envy, complaint, and blame" into an aggressive form of "patriotism" that was filled with "blind self-confidence, empty boasts, and pent-up hatred".[46] The "ultra-nationalism", being deployed by the Chinese Communist Party since the Tiananmen protests, has also become "a euphemism for worship of violence in service of autocratic goals."[47]In 2009 during his trial for "inciting subversion of state power" due to his participation in drafting the Charter 08 manifesto which demanded freedom of expression, human rights and democratic elections, he wrote an essay known as "I Have No Enemies", stating that "the mentality of enmity can poison a nation's spirit, instigate brutal life and death struggles, destroy a society's tolerance and humanity, and block a nation's progress towards freedom and democracy", and he declared that he had no enemies, and no hatred.[48]In international affairs, he supported U.S. President George W. Bush's 2001 invasion of Afghanistan, his 2003 invasion of Iraq and subsequent reelection.[49][50][51][52]In his 2004 article titled "Victory to the Anglo-American Freedom Alliance", he praised the U.S.-led post-Cold War conflicts as "best examples of how war should be conducted in a modern civilization." He wrote "regardless of the savagery of the terrorists, and regardless of the instability of Iraq's situation, and, what's more, regardless of how patriotic youth might despise proponents of the United States such as myself, my support for the invasion of Iraq will not waver. Just as, from the beginning, I believed that the military intervention of Britain and the United States would be victorious, I am still full of belief in the final victory of the Freedom Alliance and the democratic future of Iraq, and even if the armed forces of Britain and the United States should encounter some obstacles such as those that they are currently facing, this belief of mine will not change." He predicted "a free, democratic and peaceful Iraq will emerge."[53]He commented on Islamism that, "a culture and (religious) system that produced this kind of threat (Islamic fundamentalism), must be extremely intolerant and blood-thirsty." He also criticized the Iraq prison abuse scandals.[54] During the 2004 US presidential election, firstnameplaceholder again praised Bush for his war effort against Iraq and condemned Democratic Party candidate John Kerry for not sufficiently supporting the wars in which the U.S. was then involved.[53][55]On Israel, he said "without America's protection, the long persecuted Jews who faced extermination during World War II, probably would again be drowned by the Islamic world's hatred." He had defended U.S. policies in the Israeli–Palestinian conflict, which he thought was the fault of the "provocateur" Palestinians.[56][52]
<h2>Human rights activities</h2>
On 27 April 1989, firstnameplaceholder returned to Beijing and immediately became an active supporter of the popular movement. When the army seemed ready to violently eject the students who persistently occupied Tiananmen Square in order to challenge the government and the army that was enforcing its declaration of martial law, he initiated a four-man three-day hunger strike on 2 June. Later referred to as the "Tiananmen Four Gentlemen Hunger Strike", the action earned the trust of the students. He requested that both the government and the students abandon the ideology of class struggle and adopt a new political culture of dialogue and compromise. Although it was too late to prevent the massacre which started on the night of 3 June from occurring beyond the square, he and his colleagues successfully negotiated with the student leaders and the army commander so the several thousand students who remained in the square would all be allowed to peacefully withdraw from it, thus preventing a possibly much larger scale of bloodshed.[57]On 5 June, firstnameplaceholder was arrested and detained in Qincheng Prison for his alleged role in the movement, and three months later he was expelled from Beijing Normal University. The government's media issued numerous publications which labeled him a "mad dog" and a "black hand" because he had allegedly incited and manipulated the student movement to overthrow the government and socialism.  His publications were banned, including his fourth book, Going Naked Toward God, which was then in press. In Taiwan however, his first and third books, Criticism of the Choice: Dialogues with Leading Thinker Li Zehou (1989), and the two-volume Mysteries of Thought and Dreams of Mankind (1990) were republished with some additions.[58]In January 1991, 19 months after his arrest, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was convicted of "counter-revolutionary propaganda and incitement"[11] but he was exempted from criminal punishment due to his "major meritorious action" for preventing what could have been a bloody confrontation in Tiananmen Square. After his release, he was divorced; both his ex-wife and son subsequently emigrated to the US. He resumed his writing, mostly on human rights and political issues, but was not allowed to publish them in Mainland China.In 1992, while in Taiwan, he published his first book after his imprisonment, The Monologues of a Doomsday's Survivor, a controversial memoir which contains his confessions and his political criticism of the popular movement in 1989.In January 1993, firstnameplaceholder was invited to visit Australia and the United States for the interviews in the documentary film The Gate of Heavenly Peace. Although many of his friends suggested that he take refuge abroad, firstnameplaceholder returned to China in May 1993 and continued his freelance writing.[59]On 18 May 1995, the Chinese police took firstnameplaceholder into custody for launching a petition campaign on the eve of the sixth anniversary of the Tiananmen protests calling on the government to reassess the event and initiate political reform. He was held under residential surveillance in the suburbs of Beijing for nine months. He was released in February 1996 but was arrested again on 8 October for writing an October Tenth Declaration, coauthored by him and another prominent dissident, Wang Xizhe, mainly on the Taiwan issue, that advocated a peaceful reunification in order to oppose the Chinese Communist Party's forceful threats against the island. He was ordered to serve three years of reeducation through labor[11][60] "for disturbing public order" for that statement.[61]In 1996, while he was still imprisoned in the labor camp, firstnameplaceholder married firstnameplaceholder Xia, who herself not a prisoner.[62] Because she was the only person from the outside allowed to visit him in prison, she was deemed his "most important link to the outside world."[63]After his release on 7 October 1999, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder resumed his freelance writing. However, it was reported[64] that the government built a sentry station next to his home and his phone calls and internet connections were tapped.In 2000, while in Taiwan, firstnameplaceholder published the book A Nation That Lies to Conscience, a 400-page political criticism. Also published, in Hong Kong, was a Selection of Poems, a 450-page collection of the poems as correspondences between him and his wife during his imprisonment; it was coauthored by firstnameplaceholder and his wife. The last of three books which he published during the year was published in Mainland China, later titled "Selected Poems of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder and firstnameplaceholder Xia" (劉曉波劉霞詩選), a 250-page collection of literary critiques coauthored by a popular young writer and himself under his unknown pen name of "Lao Xiao". The same year, firstnameplaceholder participated in founding the "Independent Chinese PEN Center," and was elected to both its board of directors and as its president in November 2003; he was reelected to both positions two years later. In 2007, he did not seek reelection as president but held his position as a board member until he was detained by the police in December 2008.[65]In 2003, when firstnameplaceholder started writing a human rights report on China at his home, his computer, letters and documents were all confiscated by the government. He once said, "at firstnameplaceholder Xia's [firstnameplaceholder's wife] birthday, her best friend brought two bottles of wine to [my home] but was blocked by the police from coming in. I ordered a [birthday] cake and the police also rejected the man who delivered the cake to us. I quarreled with them and the police said, 'it is for the sake of your security. It has happened many bomb attacks in these days.'"[64] Those measures were loosened until 2007, prior to the 2008 Beijing Olympic Games.[64]In January 2005, following the death of former Chinese Premier Zhao Ziyang, who had shown sympathy towards the student demonstrations in 1989, firstnameplaceholder was immediately put under house arrest for two weeks before he learned about the death of Zhao.[66] The same year, he published two more books in the US, The Future of Free China Exists in Civil Society, and Single-Blade Poisonous Sword: Criticism of Chinese Nationalism.firstnameplaceholder's writing is considered subversive by the Communist Party of China, and his name is censored.[67] He called for multi-party elections and free markets, advocated the values of freedom, supported separation of powers and urged the governments to be accountable for its wrongdoings.[68] When not in prison, he was the subject of government monitoring and he was also put under house arrest during times that the government considered politically sensitive.[64]firstnameplaceholder's human rights work received international recognition. In 2004, Reporters Without Borders awarded him the Fondation de France Prize as a defender of press freedom.[69]
<h2>Charter 08</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder actively participated in the writing of Charter 08 and signed it along with more than three hundred Chinese citizens. The Charter is a manifesto that was released on 10 December 2008 in order to coincide with the 60th anniversary of the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It was written in the style of the Czechoslovak Charter 77, and calls for more freedom of expression, human rights, more democratic elections, the privatization of state enterprises and land, and economic liberalism.[72] As of September 2010, the Charter has collected over 10,000 signatures.[73][74]
<h2>2008–2017 arrest, trial, and imprisonment</h2>
Two days before the official release of Charter 08, late on the evening of 8 December 2008, firstnameplaceholder was taken into custody by the police,[75] as was Zhang Zuhua, another scholar and Charter 08 signatory. According to Zhang, the two were detained on suspicion of collecting signatures for the Charter.[73] While firstnameplaceholder was detained in solitary confinement,[76] he was forbidden to meet with either his lawyer or his family, but he was allowed to eat lunch with his wife, firstnameplaceholder Xia, and two policemen on New Year's Day 2009.[77] On 23 June 2009, the Beijing procuratorate approved firstnameplaceholder's arrest on charges of "suspicion of inciting subversion of state power," a crime under Article 105 of China's Criminal Law.[78] In a Xinhua news release announcing firstnameplaceholder's arrest, the Beijing Public Security Bureau alleged that firstnameplaceholder had incited the subversion of state power and the overthrow of the socialist system through methods such as spreading rumors and slander, citing almost verbatim Article 105; the Beijing PSB also noted that firstnameplaceholder had "fully confessed".[9]On 1 December 2009, Beijing police transferred firstnameplaceholder's case to the procuratorate for investigation and processing;[10] on 10 December, the procuratorate formally indicted firstnameplaceholder on charges of "inciting subversion of state power" and sent his lawyers, Shang Baojun and Ding Xikui, the indictment document.[10] He was tried at Beijing No. 1 Intermediate Court on 23 December 2009. His wife was not permitted to observe the hearing, although his brother-in-law was present.[10][79][80] Diplomats from more than a dozen countries – including the U.S., Britain, Canada, Sweden, Australia and New Zealand – were denied access to the court in order to watch the trial and they all stood outside the court for its duration.[81] Among them were Gregory May, political officer at the U.S. Embassy, and Nicholas Weeks, first secretary of the Swedish Embassy.[82]firstnameplaceholder wrote a statement, entitled "I have no enemies", intending for it to be read at his trial. He was never given the right to speak. The essay was later read in the 2010 Nobel Peace Prize ceremony, which firstnameplaceholder was unable to attend due to his imprisonment.[83] On 25 December 2009, firstnameplaceholder was sentenced to eleven years' imprisonment and two years' deprivation of political rights by the Beijing No. 2 Intermediate Court on charges of "inciting subversion of state power". According to firstnameplaceholder's family and counsel, he planned to appeal the judgment.[11] In the verdict, Charter 08 was named as part of the evidence supporting his conviction.[11] John Pomfret of The Washington Post said Christmas Day was chosen to dump the news because the Chinese government believed Westerners were less likely to take notice on a holiday.[84]firstnameplaceholder argued that his verdict violated both the Chinese constitution and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights of the United Nations. He argued that charges against him of 'spreading rumors, slandering and in other ways inciting the subversion of the government and overturning the socialist system' were contrived, as he did not fabricate or create false information, nor did he besmirch the good name and character of others by merely expressing a point of view, a value judgment.[85]Criminal law professor Gao Mingxuan pointed out that publishing provocative speech on the Internet and gathering signatures to advocate overthrow of government is no longer freedom of speech, it's an act prohibited by criminal law.[86] The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People's Republic of China pointed out that there are similar laws in many countries to prevent activities to advocate overthow of government, such as the Treason Act 1351 of England.[87]firstnameplaceholder's detention was condemned worldwide by both human rights organizations and foreign countries. On 11 December 2008, the U.S. Department of State called for firstnameplaceholder's release,[88] which was followed on 22 December 2008 by a similar request from a consortium of scholars, writers, lawyers and human rights advocates.[89] Additionally, on 21 January 2009, 300 international writers, including Salman Rushdie, Margaret Atwood, Ha Jin and Jung Chang, called for firstnameplaceholder's release in a statement put out through PEN.[77] In March 2009, the One World Film Festival awarded firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder the Homo Homini Award, organized by the People in Need foundation, for promoting freedom of speech, democratic principles and human rights.[90]In December 2009, the European Union and United States issued formal appeals calling for the unconditional release of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder.[91][92] China's government, responding to the international calls prior to the verdict, stated that other nations should "respect China's judicial sovereignty and not do things that will interfere in China's internal affairs".[93]Responding to the verdict, United Nations Human Rights Commissioner Navanethem Pillay expressed concern about the deterioration of political rights in China.[94] German Chancellor Angela Merkel strongly criticized the verdict, stating "despite the great progress in other areas in the expression of views, I regret that the Chinese government still massively restricts press freedom."[95] Canada and Switzerland also condemned the verdict.[96][97] The Republic of China President Ma Ying-jeou called on Beijing to "tolerate dissent".[98] On 6 January 2010, former Czech president Václav Havel joined with other communist-era dissidents at the Chinese Embassy in Prague to present a petition calling for firstnameplaceholder's release.[99] On 22 January 2010, European Association for Chinese Studies sent an open letter to Hu Jintao on behalf of over 800 scholars from 36 countries calling for firstnameplaceholder's release.[100]On 18 January 2010, firstnameplaceholder was nominated for the 2010 Nobel Peace Prize by Václav Havel, the 14th Dalai Lama, André Glucksmann, Vartan Gregorian, Mike Moore, Karel Schwarzenberg, Desmond Tutu and Grigory Yavlinsky.[101] China's Foreign Ministry spokesperson Ma Zhaoxu stated that awarding the Nobel Peace Prize to firstnameplaceholder would be "totally wrong".[102] Geir Lundestad, a secretary of the Nobel Committee, stated the award would not be influenced by Beijing's opposition.[102] On 25 September 2010, The New York Times reported that a petition in support of the Nobel nomination was being circulated in China.[103]On 14 September 2010, the Mayor of Reykjavík, Jón Gnarr, met on an unrelated matter with CPC Politburo member firstnameplaceholder Qi and demanded China set the dissident firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder free. Also that September Václav Havel, Dana Němcová and Václav Malý, leaders of Czechoslovakia's Velvet Revolution, published an open letter in the International Herald Tribune calling for the award to be given to firstnameplaceholder, while a petition began to circulate soon afterwards.[103][104]On 6 October 2010, the non-governmental organization Freedom Now, which serves as an international counsel to firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder as retained by his family, publicly released a letter from 30 members of the U.S. Congress to President Barack Obama, urging him to directly raise both firstnameplaceholder's case and that of fellow imprisoned dissident Gao Zhisheng to Chinese President Hu Jintao at the G-20 Summit in November 2010.[105] The Republic of China's President Ma Ying-jiu congratulated firstnameplaceholder on winning the Nobel Prize and requested that the Chinese authorities improve their impression in the eyes of the world by respecting human rights, but did not call for his release from prison.[106]On 15 October 2010, the China News Service indicated that in 2008 firstnameplaceholder had received a financial endowment from the National Endowment for Democracy,[107] which is "a Washington-based nonprofit funded largely by the US Congress".[108]In 2011, a WorldWideReading was dedicated to firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder; on 20 March, readings in more than 60 towns and cities on all continents and  broadcast via radio stations were held in his honor. The "Freedom for firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder" appeal was supported by more than 700 writers from around the world, among them Nobel Prize laureates John M. Coetzee, Nadine Gordimer, Herta Müller and Elfriede Jelinek, as well as Breyten Breytenbach, Eliot Weinberger, Salman Rushdie, Vikram Seth, Mario Vargas Llosa, Wolf Biermann and Dave Eggers.On 20 March 2011, the international literature festival called for a worldwide reading for firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder. More than 700 authors from all continents signed the appeal and over 150 institutions took part in the event.
[109]On 19 November 2013, his wife, firstnameplaceholder Xia, who was placed under house arrest shortly after firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, filed an appeal for firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's retrial. This move has been called "extraordinary" because the action could refocus the world's attention on China's human rights record.[110]
According to her attorney, Mo Shaoping, firstnameplaceholder Xia visited her husband in Jinzhou Prison in Liaoning and gained his approval before filing this motion.[110]
<h2>Nobel Peace Prize</h2>
On 8 October 2010, the Nobel Committee awarded firstnameplaceholder the Nobel Peace Prize "for his long and non-violent struggle for fundamental human rights in China",[111] saying that firstnameplaceholder had long been front-runner as the recipient of the prize.[112]  firstnameplaceholder's wife, firstnameplaceholder Xia, expressed gratitude on behalf of her husband to the Nobel Committee, firstnameplaceholder's proposers, and those who have been supporting him since 1989, including the Tiananmen Mothers—family members or representatives of those who were killed, or had disappeared, in the military crackdown of the protests of 4 June 1989. She said, "The prize should belong to all who signed Charter 08 and were jailed due to their support".[113]firstnameplaceholder Xia informed her husband of his award during a visit to Jinzhou Prison on 9 October 2010, one day after the official announcement.[114] She reported that firstnameplaceholder wept and dedicated the award to those who suffered as a result of the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989,[115] saying: "The award is first and foremost for the Tiananmen martyrs"[116][117] After Mrs. firstnameplaceholder returned home, she was put under house arrest and was watched by armed guards.[115][116][117] She expressed the desire to attend the awards ceremony in Norway in December, but was skeptical of her chances of being allowed to do so.[118] firstnameplaceholder Xia wrote an open letter to 143 prominent figures, encouraging them to attend the award ceremony in Oslo.[119]China reacted negatively to the award, immediately censoring news about the announcement of the award in China, though later that day limited news of the award became available.[clarification needed] Foreign news broadcasters including CNN and the BBC were immediately blocked,[120] while heavy censorship was applied to personal communications.[121][122] The Chinese Foreign Ministry denounced the award to firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, saying that it "runs completely counter to the principle of the award and it is also a desecration of the Peace Prize".[123][124][125][126] The Norwegian ambassador to the People's Republic of China was summoned by the Foreign Ministry on 8 October 2010 and presented with an official complaint about the granting of the Nobel Peace Prize to firstnameplaceholder.[127] The Chinese government has called firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder a criminal and stated that he does not deserve the prize. Chinese dissident Wei Jingsheng, in his response to news of the award, criticized firstnameplaceholder by calling him "the accomplice of the Communist regime."[128] As a result, nearly all large-scale commercial trading between Norway and China was limited, and relations soured until after firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's death in 2017, when talks resumed. In October 2018, the Norwegian King Harald V visited Beijing and met with Chinese president Xi Jinping, symbolizing the recovery of China-Norway relations.[129]Global Times, part of the Chinese government-owned People's Daily, published a statement saying that firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder and his case had properly undergone "strict legal procedure", blaming Western regimes for sensationalizing the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder story "in defiance of China's judicial sovereignty".[130] The Chinese paper also rejected the view that firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder should be described as "China's Mandela", by stating: "Mandela was a Nobel Peace Prize laureate for leading African people to anti-apartheid victory through struggles ... however, awarding a Chinese prisoner who confronted authorities and was rejected by mainstream Chinese society derides China's judicial system ... [which] makes sure a society of 1.3 billion people runs smoothly."[130]Following the announcement of the Nobel Peace Prize, celebrations in China were either stopped or curtailed,[131] and prominent intellectuals and other dissidents were detained, harassed or put under surveillance;[132] firstnameplaceholder's wife, firstnameplaceholder Xia, was placed under house arrest[133] and she was forbidden to talk to reporters even though no official charges were filed against her.[134] Sixty-five countries with missions in Norway were all invited to the Nobel Prize ceremony, but fifteen of them declined the invitation, in some cases due to heavy lobbying by China. Besides China, these countries included Russia, Kazakhstan, Tunisia, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, Iraq, Iran, Vietnam, Venezuela, Egypt, Sudan, Cuba, and Morocco.[135][136]China also imposed travel restrictions on known dissidents ahead of the ceremony. A Chinese group announced that its answer to the Nobel Peace Prize, the Confucius Peace Prize, would be awarded to former Taiwanese Vice-President Lien Chan for the bridge of peace which he has been building between Taiwan and Mainland China.[137] Lien Chan himself denied any knowledge of the $15,000 prize.[138][139]
<h2>Medical parole and health</h2>
On 26 June 2017, it was reported that firstnameplaceholder had been granted medical parole after being diagnosed with terminal liver cancer in late May 2017.[140] The Shenyang Justice Ministry released a statement on 5 July saying that the First Hospital of China Medical University, where firstnameplaceholder was being treated, has invited cancer experts from the United States, Germany and other nations to join its team of doctors. However, the statement did not mention which foreign doctors had been invited or whether or not any of them had responded.[141] A statement one day later from the hospital said that firstnameplaceholder was admitted on 7 June.[142] On 8 July, the hospital said that Joseph M. Herman[143] of University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center and Markus Büchler[144] of Heidelberg University had joined domestic experts for group consultation.[145] The foreign doctors said that firstnameplaceholder had indicated that he wanted to be sent abroad for treatment. Acknowledging the risk that is involved when a patient is moved, they deemed that firstnameplaceholder was fit to travel abroad in order to receive the care which they were willing to provide him.[146] However, the hospital said that the foreign doctors had confirmed that even they had no better treatment methods and also that the domestic doctors had done a very good job.[147] On 10 July, the hospital said that firstnameplaceholder was in critical condition, and that he was suffering from an increasingly bloated stomach, an inflamed abdominal wall, falling blood pressure, faltering kidneys, growing cancer lesions, and that they were actively rescuing him,[148][149] and were starting to use continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT). On 12 July, the hospital said that firstnameplaceholder was suffering from liver failure (Child–Pugh class C), kidney failure, respiratory failure, septic shock, blood clot, etc. and that they had communicated the necessity for tracheal intubation, but his family had rejected the procedure.[150] The New York Times reported that firstnameplaceholder's family could not be independently reached for confirmation of his condition.[151]
<h2>Death and funeral</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder died on 13 July 2017 in Shenyang's First Hospital of China Medical University from liver cancer.[152][49]Since his death, the fate of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder has been compared by the media of the world to that of Carl von Ossietzky, Nobel Laureate in 1935 who also died as a prisoner of an authoritarian regime.[153][154] Whilst firstnameplaceholder's death was widely reported in the Western media, it was mentioned only in the most perfunctory manner in the press inside mainland China. Censors deleted images or emojis of candles, or a simple "RIP"; searches on Sina Weibo regarding firstnameplaceholder's health returned the message: "According to relevant laws and policies, results for 'firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder' cannot be displayed".[155][156] The Citizen Lab documented censorship of the death of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder on WeChat and Weibo."[157] They noted on 16 July censorship on WeChat of images related to firstnameplaceholder after his death, and found that even images were being blocked in one-to-one chat the first time as well as in group chat and WeChat Moments. Based on analyses of search term blocking on Weibo, the lab confirmed that a blanket ban on searches for firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's name was still being applied. They said: "In fact, just his given name of secondnameplaceholder is enough to trigger censorship in English and both Simplified and Traditional Chinese..."[157]On the early morning of 15 July 2017, a brief funeral service was held for firstnameplaceholder which firstnameplaceholder's body was cremated following a short mourning service.[158] firstnameplaceholder's mourning ceremony and funeral were heavily stage-managed as friends and supporters had been warned that public funeral or memorial would not be tolerated.[159][160][156][161]
All the questions international journalists have been asking about firstnameplaceholder failed to appear in official transcripts of news briefings by the Chinese foreign ministry.[156]
[162][163] Germany, UK, France, the United States, Taiwan and the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein, called for the People's Republic of China to allow firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's wife firstnameplaceholder Xia to travel and leave the country if she wishes.[164]The funeral was organized in a heavy-handed fashion in which Chinese government attempted to defend their treatment of firstnameplaceholder and his wife, even though it was clear they and their family members were under perpetual surveillance. Although the funeral was attended by a brother of Ms. firstnameplaceholder and two of Mr. firstnameplaceholder's brothers and their wives, none of firstnameplaceholder's friends could be identified from official photographs of the mourners.[165][155][166]
A government spokesman said: "firstnameplaceholder Xia is free now, [but was] grief-stricken and doesn't need to be disturbed"[158][160][166] However, she has been out of sight since the video of firstnameplaceholder's sea burial.[167]
The government claimed that firstnameplaceholder had been cremated, and his ashes scattered into the sea at the family's own request. His eldest brother, firstnameplaceholder Xiaoguang appeared at the same press briefing, thanked the Chinese Communist party and also the government "because everything they have done for our family shows a high level of humanity and personal care to us".[158] According to firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's biographer Yu Jie, firstnameplaceholder had excommunicated his eldest brother, Xiaoguang, after the June 4 incident, calling him a "petty bureaucrat of the Communist Party". Yu further criticized Xiaoguang for usurping firstnameplaceholder Xia's position of next of kin and his "shamelessness" in attempting to grab a share of firstnameplaceholder's Nobel Prize money.[160][155][168][23] The government of China has been accused by firstnameplaceholder's supporters of trying to erase any shrine or traces to firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder with a sea burial of his remains.[169][170][160] Chinese human rights activists Hu Jia stated to the South China Morning Post that the hasty actions were "humiliating to a Nobel winner".[160]In Hong Kong, which still enjoys a rapidly diminishing range of civil rights that are nonexistent in mainland China, activists organized the only large-scale commemoration for firstnameplaceholder on Chinese soil.[161][171][172] A vigil outside the Beijing Liaison Office started on 10 July and continued until his death. Some newspapers in the city splashed firstnameplaceholder's portrait on their front pages to announce his death, while other pro-Communist journals relegated coverage to the inner pages.[173] In the Legislative Council legislators of the Pro-democracy camp made seven attempts to table a debate on firstnameplaceholder, but president of the council, Andrew Leung, who is from the governing faction, rejected the attempts on the grounds that the matter did not have "urgent public importance according to 16.2 of the Rules of Procedure, [and that] the wording of their petitions lacked neutrality".[174][175]People's Republic of China: The Ministry of Foreign Affairs' spokesman Geng Shuang chastised foreign officials' "improper comments on firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's death of illness" and said that China had lodged "stern representations" with their countries.[154] Geng also said on 14 July that "Conferring the prize to such a person goes against the purposes of this award. It's a blasphemy of the peace prize", according to the Voice of America.[176] But an almost identical report from Voice of America Chinese also wrote that Geng's statement could not be found from the regular press briefing's Q&A transcript posted on the ministry's website.[177]Republic of China: President of the Republic of China Tsai Ing-wen pleaded with the Communist government to "show confidence in engaging in political reform so that the Chinese can enjoy the God-given rights of freedom and democracy ... The Chinese Dream is not supposed to be about military might. It should be about taking ideas like those from firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder into consideration. Only through democracy, in which every Chinese person has freedom and respect, can China truly become a proud and important country."[154] In his tribute on Facebook, former ROC President and leader of the Kuomintang Ma Ying-jeou said the Chinese dream should develop proportionally on freedom and human rights. Mayor of Taipei Ko Wen-je expressed condolences.[178][179]Tibetan Government in Exile: The 14th Dalai Lama, who himself is the 1989 Nobel Peace Prize winner, the Speaker of the Tibetan Parliament-in-Exile, Khenpo Sonam Tenphel,[180] and Prime Minister of the Tibetan Government-in-Exile, Lobsang Sangay[181] mourned the death of firstnameplaceholder.[182] The Dalai Lama issued the following short statement on 14 July 2017, "I am deeply saddened to learn that fellow Nobel Laureate firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder has passed away while undergoing a lengthy prison sentence. I offer my prayers and condolences to his wife, firstnameplaceholder Xia and to other members of his family. Although he is no longer living, the rest of us can best pay honor to firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder by carrying forward the principles he has long embodied, which would lead to a more harmonious, stable and prosperous China. It is my belief that Nobel Laureate firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's unceasing efforts in the cause of freedom will bear fruit before long."[183]France: President Emmanuel Macron, who hosted a press conference for visiting US President Trump, later paid tribute to Dr firstnameplaceholder in a tweet, praising him as "a freedom fighter".[184] French Foreign Minister Jean-Yves Le Drian expressed condolences as well.[185]Germany: Chancellor Angela Merkel described firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder as a "courageous fighter for civil rights and freedom of expression".[186] Foreign Minister Sigmar Gabriel said that "China now has the responsibility to quickly, transparently and plausibly answer the question of whether the cancer could not have been identified much earlier."[164]Japan: Both the Minister of Foreign affairs Fumio Kishida[187][188] and Chief Cabinet Secretary Yoshihide Suga[189] expressed condolences.Norway: Prime Minister of Norway Erna Solberg said that "It is with deep grief that I received the news of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's passing. firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was for decades a central voice for human rights and China's further development."[190] Thorbjørn Jagland, a member and former chairman of the Norwegian Nobel Committee, and a former Prime Minister of Norway, compared firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder to Carl von Ossietzky, noting that he became the second Nobel Prize laureate who was prevented from receiving the prize because he died in prison.[191] An official statement by the Norwegian Nobel Committee blamed the Chinese communist regime for firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's death and condemned the erosion of human rights as a universal value; on behalf of the committee, chairwoman Reiss-Andersen said that "firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder had contributed to the fraternity of peoples through his non-violent resistance against the oppressive actions of the Communist regime in China" and that "the Chinese Government bears a heavy responsibility for his premature death". Reiss-Andersen said firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder will remain "a powerful symbol for all who fight for freedom, democracy and a better world".[19] She also lamented the "sad and disturbing fact that the representatives of the free world, who themselves hold democracy and human rights in high regard, are less willing to stand up for those rights for the benefit of others."[154]United Kingdom: Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson called firstnameplaceholder a "lifelong campaigner for democracy, human rights and peace", and said that his death was a huge loss. He further stated that "firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder should have been allowed to choose his own medical treatment overseas" and called for the Chinese authorities "to lift all restrictions" on firstnameplaceholder's widow.[192]United States: The White House Press Secretary issued a statement of condolences.[193][194] Secretary of State Rex Tillerson said that "Mr firstnameplaceholder dedicated his life to the betterment of his country and humankind, and to the pursuit of justice and liberty," and urged Beijing to free firstnameplaceholder's widow.[195][196] U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Nikki Haley[197][198] and U.S. Ambassador to China Terry Branstad[199][200] both expressed condolences.The Congressional-Executive Commission on China, whose commissioners come from both the House of Representatives and Senate, issued a bipartisan statement.[201] The United States House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights and International Organizations held a hearing on firstnameplaceholder and his death (entitled "The Tragic Case of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder").[202][203] Nancy Pelosi, the House Minority Leader, was saddened by the news of firstnameplaceholder's passing.[204] Back on 18 May, both Republican Senator Ted Cruz and Representative Mark Meadows had re-introduced bills to resume their push to rename the address of Embassy of China in Washington, D.C. as "1 firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Plaza."[205][206] Bob Fu, a Chinese American human rights activist and pastor, told The Texas Tribune that he is "definitely more optimistic" about Cruz's bill getting enacted with President Trump in office.[207] Later Senator Marco Rubio write a letter to sent firstnameplaceholder Xia, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's widow. Senator John McCain said that "this is only the latest example of Communist China's assault on human rights, democracy, and freedom."[208]Former President George W. Bush and First Lady Laura Bush also expressed condolences.[209]European Union: President of the European Commission Jean-Claude Juncker and President of the European Council Donald Tusk said in a joint statement that they had learned of firstnameplaceholder's death "with deep sadness" and that "We appeal to the Chinese authorities to allow his wife, Ms firstnameplaceholder Xia and his family to bury firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder at a place and in a manner of their choosing, and to allow them to grieve in peace".[210]United Nations: UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein said, "The human rights movement in China and across the world has lost a principled champion who devoted his life to defending and promoting human rights, peacefully and consistently, and who was jailed for standing up for his beliefs. firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was the true embodiment of the democratic, non-violent ideals he so ardently advocated."[195]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (born firstnameplaceholder Eugenia Johnson, 29 October 1938) is a Liberian politician who served as the 24th President of Liberia from 2006 to 2018. Sirleaf was the first elected female head of state in Africa.Sirleaf was born in Monrovia to a Gola father and Kru-German mother. She was educated at the College of West Africa. She completed her education in the United States, where she studied at Madison Business College and Harvard University. She returned to Liberia to work in William Tolbert's government as Deputy Minister of Finance from 1971 to 1974. Later she worked again in the West, for the World Bank in the Caribbean and Latin America. In 1979, she received a cabinet appointment as Minister of Finance, serving to 1980.After Samuel Doe seized power that year in a coup d'état and executed Tolbert, Sirleaf fled to the United States. She worked for Citibank and then the Equator Bank. She returned to Liberia to contest a senatorial seat for Montserrado County in 1985, an election that was disputed. She was arrested as a result of her open criticism of the military government in 1985 and was sentenced to ten years imprisonment, although was later released.[1]Sirleaf continued to be involved in politics. She finished in second place at the 1997 presidential election, which was won by Charles Taylor.She won the 2005 presidential election and took office on 16 January 2006. She was re-elected in 2011. She was the first woman in Africa elected as president of her country.  She won the Nobel Peace Prize in 2011, in recognition of her efforts to bring women into the peacekeeping process. She has received numerous other awards for her leadership.In June 2016, Sirleaf was elected as the Chair of the Economic Community of West African States, making her the first woman to hold the position since it was created.[2]
<h2>Family background</h2>
Sirleaf's father was Gola and her mother had mixed Kru and German ancestry.[3][4]While not in fact Americo-Liberian in terms of ancestry, because of her parents' upbringing and her own education in the West, Sirleaf is considered to be culturally Americo-Liberian, or assumed to be Americo-Liberian. Her parents both grew up in Monrovia, a center of Americo-Liberian influence, after being born in poor rural areas.[5][6][7] Sirleaf does not identify as such.[8]Sirleaf's father, Jahmale Carney Johnson, was born into a Gola family in an impoverished rural region.[9] He was the son of a minor Gola chief named Jahmale Carney and one of his wives, Jenneh, in Julijuah, Bomi County.[10] Her father was sent to Monrovia for education, where he changed his surname to Johnson due to her father's loyalty to President Hilary R. W. Johnson, Liberia's first native-born president.[10] Jahmale Johnson grew up in Monrovia, where he was raised by an Americo-Liberian family with the surname McCritty.[10] He later entered politics; he was the first Liberian from an indigenous ethnic group to be elected to the country's national legislature.[4][9]Sirleaf's mother was also born into poverty, in Greenville.[10] Her grandmother, Juah Sarwee, sent Sirleaf's mother to the capital, Monrovia, when her German husband (Sirleaf's grandfather) had to flee the country after Liberia declared war on Germany during World War I.[9] Cecilia Dunbar, a member of a prominent Americo-Liberian family in the capital, adopted and raised Sirleaf's mother.[10]
<h2>Early life and career</h2>
Sirleaf was born in Monrovia in 1938.[9] She attended the College of West Africa, a preparatory school, from 1948 to 1955. She married James Sirleaf when she was seventeen years old. The couple had four sons together, and she was primarily occupied as a homemaker. Early on in their marriage, James worked for the Department of Agriculture, and Sirleaf worked as a bookkeeper for an auto-repair shop.[11]She traveled with her husband to the United States in 1961 to continue her education and earned an associate degree in Accounting at Madison Business College, in Madison, Wisconsin.[12] When they returned to Liberia, James continued his work in the Agriculture Department and Sirleaf pursued a career in the Treasury Department (Ministry of Finance).[11] They divorced in 1961 because of James' abuse.[4][13][11]Sirleaf returned to college to finish her bachelor's degree. In 1970, she earned a BA in economics from the Economics Institute of the University of Colorado Boulder,[14] where she also spent a summer preparing for graduate studies. Sirleaf studied Economics and Public policy at Harvard University's John F. Kennedy School of Government from 1969 to 1971, gaining a Master of Public Administration.[15] She returned to her native Liberia to work in the administration of William Tolbert, where she was appointed as Assistant Minister of Finance. Whilst in that position, she attracted attention with a "bombshell" speech to the Liberian Chamber of Commerce that claimed that the country's corporations were harming the economy by hoarding or sending their profits overseas.[16]Sirleaf served as Assistant Minister from 1972 to 1973 in the Tolbert administration. She resigned after a disagreement about government spending. Subsequently, she was appointed as Minister of Finance a few years later, serving from 1979 to April 1980.[17]Master Sergeant Samuel Doe, a member of the indigenous Krahn ethnic group, seized power in a military coup on 12 April 1980; he ordered the assassination of Tolbert and execution by firing squad of all but four members of his Cabinet. The People's Redemption Council took control of the country and led a purge against the previous government. Sirleaf initially accepted a post in the new government as the President of the Liberian Bank for Development and Investment. She fled the country in November 1980 after publicly criticising Doe and the People's Redemption Council for their management of the country.[citation needed]Sirleaf initially moved to Washington, D.C., and worked for the World Bank.[18] In 1981, she moved to Nairobi, Kenya to serve as Vice President of the African Regional Office of Citibank. She resigned from Citibank in 1985 following her involvement at the 1985 general election in Liberia. She went to work for Equator Bank,[19] a subsidiary of HSBC.[citation needed]In 1992, Sirleaf was appointed as the Director of the United Nations Development Programme's Regional Bureau for Africa at the rank of Assistant Administrator and Assistant Secretary General (ASG). She is internationally known as Africa's Iron Lady. This is due to her political prowess.[20]  She resigned from this role in 1997 in order to run for the presidency of Liberia. During her time at the UN, she was one of the seven internationally eminent persons designated in 1999 by the Organization of African Unity to investigate the Rwandan genocide, one of the five Commission Chairs for the Inter-Congolese Dialogue, and one of the two international experts selected by UNIFEM to investigate and report on the effect of conflict on women and women's roles in peace building. She was the initial Chairperson of the Open Society Initiative for West Africa (OSIWA) and a visiting Professor of Governance at the Ghana Institute of Management and Public Administration (GIMPA).[citation needed]
<h2>Political career</h2>
While working at Citibank, Sirleaf returned to Liberia in 1985 to run for Vice President under Jackson Doe on the ticket of the Liberian Action Party in the 1985 elections. However, Sirleaf was placed under house arrest in August 1985 and soon after sentenced to ten years in prison for sedition, as a consequence of a speech in which she insulted the members of the Samuel Doe regime. Following international calls for her release, Samuel Doe pardoned and released her in September. Due to government pressure, she was removed from the presidential ticket and instead ran for a Senate seat in Montserrado County.In the 1985 elections, Samuel Doe and the National Democratic Party won the presidency and large majorities in both houses. The elections were widely condemned as neither free nor fair. Sirleaf was declared the winner of her Senate race, but she refused to accept the seat in protest of the election fraud.After an attempted coup against the Doe government by Thomas Quiwonkpa on 12 November 1985, Sirleaf was arrested and imprisoned again on 13 November by Doe's forces. Despite continuing to refuse to accept her seat in the Senate, she was released in July 1986. She secretly fled the country to the United States later that year.[21]At the beginning of the First Liberian Civil War in 1989, Sirleaf supported Charles Taylor's rebellion against Doe. She helped raise money for the war and founded the National Patriotic Front of Liberia with Taylor and Tom Woewiyu. Because of this, Doe's government recommended that Sirleaf be banned from politics in Liberia for 30 years.But, she later opposed Taylor's handling of the war and his treatment of rival opposition leaders such as Jackson Doe. By 1996, the presence of Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) peacekeepers led to a cessation of hostilities. The nation held the 1997 general election, which Sirleaf returned to Liberia to contest. She ran as the presidential candidate for the Unity Party and placed second in a controversial election, getting 25% of the vote to Charles Taylor's 75%. After controversy about the results and being accused of treason, Sirleaf left Liberia and went into exile in Abidjan, Ivory Coast.[21]After the end of the Second Liberian Civil War and the establishment of a transitional government, Sirleaf was proposed as a possible candidate for chairman of the government. Ultimately, Gyude Bryant, a political neutral, was chosen as chairman, while Sirleaf served as head of the Governance Reform Commission.Sirleaf stood for president as the candidate of the Unity Party in the 2005 general election. She placed second in the first round of voting behind  George Weah, a former footballer.[22] In the subsequent run-off election, Sirleaf earned 59% of the vote versus 40% for Weah, though Weah disputed the results.The announcement of the new leader was postponed until further election investigations were carried out. On 23 November 2005, Sirleaf was declared the winner of the Liberian election and confirmed as the country's next president and the first woman to be elected as president of an African country.[23] Her inauguration took place on 16 January 2006. It was attended by many foreign dignitaries, including United States Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and First Lady Laura Bush, .In January 2010, Sirleaf announced that she would run for a second term in office in the 2011 presidential election while speaking to a joint session of the Legislature.[24] Opposition leaders noted that in doing so, she had broken a promise made during her 2005 campaign to only serve one term if elected.[25] Sirleaf was renominated as the Unity Party's presidential candidate at the party's national convention on 31 October 2010.[26] That same day, Vice President Joseph Boakai was nominated by Sirleaf and confirmed by the delegates as Sirleaf's running mate.[26]The awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize to Sirleaf four days prior to the election sparked criticism from opposition parties, with Congress for Democratic Change candidate Winston Tubman calling the award "undeserved" and "a political interference in our country's politics."[27] Sirleaf called the timing of the award a coincidence and avoided mentioning the award during the final days of campaigning.[28]Sirleaf garnered 43.9% of the vote in the first round, more than any other candidate but short of the 50% needed to avoid a run-off. Tubman came in second with 32.7%, pitting him against Sirleaf in the second round.[29] Tubman called for a boycott of the run-off, claiming that the results of the first round had been fraudulent.[30] Sirleaf denied the allegations, and international observers reported that the first round election had been free, fair and transparent.[31] As a result of the boycott, Sirleaf won the second round with 90.7% of the vote, though voter turnout significantly declined from the first round.[32] Following the election, Sirleaf announced the creation of a "national peace and reconciliation initiative," led by Nobel Peace Prize laureate Leymah Gbowee, to address the country's divisions and begin "a national dialogue that would bring us together."[33] She took the presidential oath for her second presidency on 16 January 2012.[34]Sirleaf crossed party lines to support George Weah in the 2017 presidential campaign.[35]  In the late evening hours of 13 January 2018, she along with some officials of the Unity Party were expelled[36] by the National Executive Committee of the party, for failing to support Unity's presidential candidate,  Joseph Boakai.
<h2>Presidency</h2>
A fire broke out at the Executive Mansion on 26 July 2006, seriously damaging the structure. An independent panel formed to investigate the incident ruled out arson, attributing the fire to an electrical malfunction.[37] Sirleaf's government called funding for the repair of the mansion a low priority in the face of more pressing needs, with Sirleaf transferring her office to the nearby Foreign Ministry building and choosing to live at her personal home in Monrovia.[38][39]On 26 July 2007, Sirleaf celebrated Liberia's 160th Independence Day under the theme "Liberia at 160: Reclaiming the future." She took an unprecedented and symbolic move by asking 25-year-old Liberian activist Kimmie Weeks to serve as National Orator for the celebrations, where Weeks called for the government to prioritize education and health care. A few days later, President Sirleaf issued an Executive Order making education free and compulsory for all elementary school aged children.[40]On 4th, October 2010, Sirleaf signed into law a Freedom of Information bill, the first legislation of its kind in West Africa.[41][42] In recognition of this, she became the first sitting head of state to receive the Friend of the Media in Africa Award from The African Editor's Union.[43]On 1 April 2011, Sirleaf told reporters that she planned to charge an opposition candidate with sedition for organizing a rally protesting corruption in the government. Her press secretary later clarified that the remark had been an April Fools' prank.[44]From the beginning of her presidency, Sirleaf vowed to make reduction of the national debt, which stood at approximately US$4.9 billion in 2006, a top priority for her administration. The United States became the first country to grant debt relief to Liberia, waiving the full $391 million owed to it by Liberia in early 2007.[45] In September of that year, the G-8 headed by German Chancellor Angela Merkel provided $324.5 million to paying off 60% of Liberia's debt to the International Monetary Fund, crediting their decision to the macroeconomic policies pursued by the Sirleaf administration.[46]In April 2009, the government successfully wrote off an additional $1.2 billion in foreign commercial debt in a deal that saw the government buy back the debt at a 97% discounted rate through financing provided by the International Development Association, Germany, Norway, the United States, and the United Kingdom.[47] The discounted rate was the largest ever for a developing country.[47]The country was deemed eligible to participate in the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries initiative in 2008.[48] In June 2010, the country reached the completion point of the HIPC initiative, qualifying it for relief from its entire external debt.[49] That same month, the World Bank and IMF agreed to fund $1.5 billion in writing off the Liberia's multilateral debt.[50] On 16 September, the Paris Club agreed to cancel $1.26 billion, with independent bilateral creditors canceling an additional $107 million, essentially writing off Liberia's remaining external debt.[51] Sirleaf vowed to prevent unsustainable borrowing in the future by restricting annual borrowing to 3% of GDP and limiting expenditure of all borrowed funds to one-off infrastructure projects.[52]In 2006, the Truth and Reconciliation Commission began work with a mandate to "promote national peace, security, unity and reconciliation" by investigating more than 20 years of civil conflict in the country. The TRC was formed through a legislation in 2005 under the Interim government headed by C. Gyude Bryant.In their final report, issued in June 2009, the TRC included Sirleaf in a list of 50 names of people that should be "specifically barred from holding public offices; elected or appointed for a period of thirty (30) years" for "being associated with former warring factions."[53] The proposed ban stemmed from her financial support of former President Taylor in the early years of the First Liberian Civil War.On 26 July 2009, Sirleaf apologized to Liberia for supporting Charles Taylor, saying: "When the true nature of Mr. Taylor's intentions became known, there was no more impassioned critic or strong opponent to him in a democratic process" than she.[54] On 28 August, the Legislature announced they must "consult our constituents for about a year" before deciding whether or not to implement the Commission's recommendations.[55]During an appearance at the Council on Foreign Relations in 2010, Sirleaf argued that the implementation of the TRC's recommended ban would unconstitutionally violate her right to due process.[56] In October 2010, the chairman of Sirleaf's Unity Party, Varney Sherman, argued that implementation of the recommendation would be unconstitutional, as Article 21(a) of the Constitution prohibits ex post facto laws, and Sirleaf had broken no law by financially supporting Taylor that imposed a ban from public office as a penalty.[57]In January 2011, the Supreme Court ruled in Williams v. Tah, a case brought by another person recommended for being banned from public office in the TRC report, that the TRC's recommendation was an unconstitutional violation of the listed individuals' right to procedural due process, and that it would be unconstitutional for the government to implement the proposed bans.[58]Following a speech made by United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton in December 2011 that America's foreign aid would be used to promote the protection of gay rights,[59] the issue of LGBT rights became a significant political topic in Liberia. According to The Guardian, "Since Clinton's remarks, Liberian newspapers have published numerous articles and editorials describing homosexuality as 'desecrating', 'abusive' and an 'abomination'."[59] Liberian law made "voluntary sodomy" punishable by up to one year in prison, although it has not been used to prosecute anyone in several years.[60]In February 2012, Bong County Senator Jewel Taylor proposed a bill that would carry a term of ten years in prison for homosexual activity, while a similar bill was introduced in the House of Representatives.[59] On 19 March, Sirleaf addressed the issue, saying that she would not repeal the current law but would also not sign into law either of the two proposed bills. Sirleaf added, "We like ourselves just the way we are [...] We've got certain traditional values in our society that we would like to preserve."[59] According to Tiawan Gongloe, Liberia's former Solicitor General, "If she tried to decriminalise the [current anti-gay] law it would be political suicide."[59]In a letter to The Guardian, Sirleaf's press secretary challenged the portrayal of her remarks in the media saying that:  "There currently exists no law referencing homosexuality in Liberia, and as such the President could not be defending a law on homosexuality. The President is on record as saying [...] that any law brought before her regarding homosexuality will be vetoed. This statement also applies to an initial attempt by two members of the Liberian legislature to introduce tougher laws targeting homosexuality." The letter added "the status quo in Liberia has been one of tolerance and no one has ever been prosecuted under that [current] law," and went on to hint at future possible liberalization stating that "the President thinks that with the unprecedented freedom of speech and expression Liberia enjoys today, our budding democracy will be strong enough to accommodate new ideas and debate both their value and Liberia's laws with openness, respect and independence."[61] The Guardian published a correction to its story: "'Nobel peace prize winner defends law criminalising homosexuality in Liberia' was updated to restore material cut in the editing process. The restored material clarifies the stance that President firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder is taking on laws concerning homosexuality in Liberia. That is: she refuses to dismantle the existing anti-sodomy law, while also saying she will refuse to sign two new bills that would toughen laws on homosexuality." The comments, letter, and clarification suggest that she considered the status quo for gay rights in Liberia to be one of de facto tolerance until the recent controversy, and did not support decriminalization of homosexuality, but also refused to support further criminalisation of homosexual acts which was being attempted in Liberia. She reaffirmed this view during an interview with Tony Blair.[62]Upon her election to office, Sirleaf made her first foreign trip as President to neighboring Ivory Coast, meeting with Ivorian President Laurent Gbagbo in an attempt to repair relations between the two countries following Côte d'Ivoire's support of the Movement for Democracy in Liberia during the Second Liberian Civil War.[63] During the 2010–2011 Ivorian crisis, Sirleaf, as chairperson of the Mano River Union, supported ECOWAS's recognition of Gbagbo's opponent, Alassane Ouattara, as the winner of the disputed presidential election, but rejected calls for a military solution to the crisis.[64]Sirleaf also forged close relations with the United States, Liberia's traditional ally. Following the establishment of United States Africa Command (AFRICOM) by the United States military, Sirleaf offered to allow the US to headquarter the new command in Liberia, the only African leader to do so.[65] The command was eventually headquartered in Stuttgart, Germany. On 15 March 2006, President Sirleaf addressed a joint meeting of the United States Congress, asking for American support to help her country "become a brilliant beacon, an example to Africa and the world of what love of liberty can achieve."[66]Sirleaf has also strengthened relations with the People's Republic of China, reaffirming Liberia's commitment to the One-China policy.[67] In return, China has contributed to Liberia's reconstruction, building several transmitters to extend the Liberia Broadcasting System nationwide and constructing a new campus for the University of Liberia.[68][69]Sirleaf is a member of the Council of Women World Leaders, an international network of current and former women presidents and prime ministers whose mission is to mobilize the highest-level women leaders globally for collective action on issues of critical importance to women and equitable development.[70]During the 2011 Libyan civil war, Sirleaf added her voice to the international community who asked the previous Libyan leader Muammar al-Gaddafi to cease the use of violence and tactics of political repression.[71] However, she criticized the international military intervention in Libya, declaring that "violence does not help the process whichever way it comes".[72] Her government later severed diplomatic ties with Libya, stating that "The Government took the decision after a careful review of the situation in Libya and determined that the Government of Colonel Gaddafi has lost the legitimacy to govern Libya."[73]On 27 February 2015, President Sirleaf was expected to make a visit to U.S. President Barack Obama at the White House in Washington, D.C., according to an official online statement from the Office of the White House Press Secretary. Among other issues, they planned to discuss the hope to expeditiously close the recent 2013–2015 Ebola virus epidemic, which heavily affected Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea, and other areas in West Africa (and beyond in other countries due to importation of cases for treatment and some new infections), down to an ideal of zero reported cases in Liberia and nearby areas in the near future, with continuing monitoring and reporting, care, support, and fiscal and professional assistance. They also planned to discuss how to sustain and rebuild the healthcare infrastructure and the country's other difficulties in the wake of the massive outbreak's morbidity and mortality toll and impact on the area, as well as review progress that had been made and efforts to continue it.[74]Following her victory in the 2005 election, Sirleaf pledged to promote national reconciliation by bringing in opposition leaders into her administration.[75] Opposition politicians who joined her initial administration included Minister of Transport Jeremiah Sulunteh, Minister of Education Joseph Korto, and Ambassador to the United Nations Nathaniel Barnes. Sirleaf also appointed several women to high-level posts in her administration, with female ministers initially leading the Ministries of Finance, Law, Commerce and Industry, Gender and Development, and Youth and Sports.[76] Sirleaf said that while she had planned on appointing an all-female cabinet, she had been unable to find qualified female candidates for every position.[56]Upon her inauguration, Sirleaf promised that she would impose a "zero tolerance" policy on corruption within the government.[77] Despite this, critics have argued that corruption remains rampant within Sirleaf's administration; Information Minister Lawrence Bropleh was sacked in 2008 over allegations that he had stolen more than $200,000 in state funds, while Internal Affairs Minister Ambullai Johnson, Sirleaf's brother, was dismissed in 2010 after the disappearance of funds for county development.[78][79] Sirleaf herself has acknowledged that corruption in government remains, noting that her zero tolerance policy was hampered by the need to pass major economic reforms through the Legislature, a goal that would have been impeded by significant anti-corruption legislation and prosecutions.[78] However, Sirleaf has rejected claims that she has failed to fight corruption, pointing to the establishment of the Liberian Anti-Corruption Commission and the restructuring of the General Auditing Commission.[80]Sirleaf dismissed her entire cabinet from office on 3 November 2010, promising to reassemble the cabinet in as short a time as possible.[81] She argued that the move was taken to give her administration a "clean slate" in preparation for the final year of her term, though critics argued that the move was aimed to bolster her chances at reelection by confronting corruption in her administration.[81] By early December 2010, Sirleaf had reconstituted her entire cabinet, replacing seven of her nineteen ministers.[82][83]Upon the inauguration of Sirleaf, the entire Supreme Court bench, which had been selected as part of the transitional government in 2003, stepped down, leaving Sirleaf to fill all five seats on the Court. Sirleaf nominated Johnnie Lewis, a Yale Law School graduate and former Circuit Court judge, for the office of Chief Justice.[84] Lewis and three of Sirleaf's Associate Justice nominees, J. Emmanuel Wureh, Francis Korkpor and Gladys Johnson, were confirmed by the Senate on 2 March 2006.[85] Sirleaf's nomination of Kabineh Ja'neh, a former leader in the rebel LURD movement, as Associate Justice received criticism from the opposition Congress for Democratic Change due to concerns over Ja'neh's human rights record during the civil war, and Ja'neh was not confirmed until 9 May.[76][86]Following the death of Justice Wureh in July 2006, Sirleaf nominated Christiana Tah, a deputy minister at the Justice Ministry, to fill his seat.[87] However, the Senate later rejected Tah's nomination, leading Sirleaf to nominate her Minister of Youth and Sports, Jamesetta Howard Wolokollie, who was confirmed.[87] Justice Johnson retired from the Court on 26 March 2011 after reaching the constitutionally mandated retirement age of seventy.[87] Sirleaf nominated Phillip A. Z. Banks, her former Minister of Justice and Chairman of the Law Reform Commission, to replace Johnson in August 2011.[88] Banks was confirmed by the Senate on 20 August 2011.[89]Forbes magazine named Sirleaf as the 51st most powerful woman in the world in 2006.[90] In 2010, Newsweek listed her as one of the ten best leaders in the world, while Time counted her among the top ten female leaders.[91][92] That same year, The Economist called her "arguably the best president the country has ever had."[93] In 2010, Sirleaf released her first book, This Child Will Be Great: Memoir of a Remarkable Life by Africa's First Woman President.[94]
<h2>Life after politics</h2>
In 2018 secondnameplaceholder founded the firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Presidential Center for Women and Development,  which aims "to be a catalyst for change across Africa, by helping unleash its most abundant untapped power – its women".[95] In 2019, Director-General of the World Health Organization Tedros Adhanom appointed secondnameplaceholder as the WHO Goodwill Ambassador for the health workforce.[96] Amid the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, she stepped down from this post to serve as co-chair (alongside Helen Clark) of the WHO’s Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and Response (IPPR).[97][98] Also in 2020, she was appointed to the Development Advisory Council of the U.S. International Development Finance Corporation.[99]In addition, secondnameplaceholder holds a number of paid and unpaid positions, including the following:
<h2>Personal life</h2>
In 1956, firstnameplaceholder Johnson married James Sirleaf. They had four sons together before their divorce.[12] She grew up as a Presbyterian, but later joined her husband's Methodist faith.[102] Through her sons she has ten grandchildren.While attending college in the United States, Sirleaf became a member of the Alpha Kappa Alpha sorority and she is an honorary member of the Links, Incorporated. She is the aunt to American actress/comic Retta (born Marietta Sirleaf),[103] best known for her role as Donna Meagle on the NBC comedy Parks and Recreation.[104]Several of her children served in the Liberian government. Her son Robert Sirleaf served as head of the National Oil Company of Liberia, Charles Sirleaf holds a senior position at the Central Bank of Liberia, and stepson Fombah Sirleaf heads the Liberian National Security Agency, with responsibility for internal security. Other members of the Sirleaf family are serving in other positions in government.[105][106]
<h2>Criticism</h2>
She was accused in 2014 of interfering with a criminal investigation involving her stepson Fombah Sirleaf and the security agency.[107][108] Her Minister of Justice Christiana Tah resigned in October 2014, accusing President Sirleaf of interference with the criminal investigation into the illegal seizure of money from Korean businessmen by the NSA in a warrantless hotel raid in July 2014.[108]In 2019, her son, Charles Sirleaf, was charged with economic sabotage through the unlawful printing of local currency to the value of $75 million USD. The investigation was carried out by investigative auditing firm Kroll. [109]In November 2017 an investigation conducted by the International Consortium of Investigative Journalism cited Sirleaf among the list of politicians named in "Paradise Papers" allegations.[110]
<h2>Other honors</h2>
In 2011, Sirleaf was jointly awarded the Nobel Peace Prize with Leymah Gbowee of Liberia and Tawakkol Karman of Yemen. The three women were recognized "for their non-violent struggle for the safety of women and for women's rights to full participation in peace-building work."[130]Sirleaf was conferred the Indira Gandhi Prize by Indian President Pranab Mukherjee on 12 September 2013.[131] In 2016, she was listed as the 83rd-most powerful woman in the world by Forbes magazine.[132][135]SpeechesProfiles and interviews
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder Roberta secondnameplaceholder (born 1 February 1972) is a Liberian peace activist responsible for leading a women's nonviolent peace movement, Women of Liberia Mass Action for Peace that helped bring an end to the Second Liberian Civil War in 2003. Her efforts to end the war, along with her collaborator Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, helped usher in a period of peace and enabled a free election in 2005 that Sirleaf won.[1] She, along with Ellen Johnson Sirleaf and Tawakkul Karman, were awarded the 2011 Nobel Peace Prize "for their non-violent struggle for the safety of women and for women's rights to full participation in peace-building work."[2][3]
<h2>Early life</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was born in central Liberia on 1 February 1972. At the age of 17, she was living with her parents and two of her three sisters in Monrovia, when the First Liberian Civil War erupted in 1989,[4] throwing the country into chaos until 1996.[5]:15–25,50 "As the war subsided she learned about a program run by UNICEF,... training people to be social workers who would then counsel those traumatized by war," wrote secondnameplaceholder in her 2011 memoir, Mighty Be Our Powers.[5]:50 She did a three-month training, which led her to be aware of her own abuse at the hands of the father of her two young children, son Joshua "Nuku" and daughter Amber.[5]:50 Searching for peace and sustenance for her family, secondnameplaceholder followed her partner, called Daniel in her memoir, to Ghana where she and her growing family (her second son, Arthur, was born) lived as virtually homeless refugees and almost starved.[5]:59–68 She fled with her three children, riding a bus on credit for over a week "because I didn't have a cent," back to the chaos of Liberia, where her parents and other family members still lived.[5]:69In 1998, in an effort to gain admission to an associate of arts degree program in social work at Mother Patern College of Health Sciences. secondnameplaceholder became a volunteer within a program of the Lutheran Church in Liberia operating out of St. Peter's Lutheran Church in Monrovia, where her mother was a women's leader and secondnameplaceholder had passed her teenage years. It was called the Trauma Healing and Reconciliation Program (THRP), and it marked the beginning of secondnameplaceholder's journey toward being a peace activist:[5]:80–82The THRP's offices were new, but the program had a history. Liberia's churches had been active in peace efforts ever since the civil war started, and in 1991, Lutheran pastors, lay leaders, teachers and health workers joined with the Christian Health Association of Liberia to try to repair the psychic and social damage left by the war.[5]:81
She studied and worked her way toward her associate of art degree, conferred in 2001,[5]:111 while applying her training in trauma healing and reconciliation to try to rehabilitate some of the ex-child soldiers of Charles Taylor's army.[6] Surrounded by the images of war, she realized that "if any changes were to be made in society it had to be by the mothers".[7] secondnameplaceholder gave birth to a second daughter Nicole "Pudu", making her the mother of four, as she engaged in the next chapter of her life's journey – rallying the women of Liberia to stop the violence that was destroying their children.[8]
<h2>Education and training</h2>
secondnameplaceholder obtained an Associate of Arts degree in social work (2001) from Mother Patern College of Health Sciences in Monrovia, Liberia, and subsequently graduated with a Master of Arts in Conflict Transformation (2007) from Eastern Mennonite University in Harrisonburg, Virginia.[9] She also received a certificat in Conflict Prevention and Peacebuilding Training from the United Nations Institute for Training, the Healing Victims of War Trauma Center in Cameroon, and Non-Violent Peace Education in Liberia[10]
<h2>Career</h2>
secondnameplaceholder is the founder and president of secondnameplaceholder Peace Foundation Africa, founded in 2012[11] and based in Monrovia, which provides educational and leadership opportunities to girls, women and the youth in Liberia.In addition, secondnameplaceholder is the former executive director of the Women Peace and Security Network Africa, based in Accra, Ghana,[12] which builds relationships across the West African sub-region in support of women's capacity to prevent, avert, and end conflicts. She is a founding member and former coordinator of the Women in Peacebuilding Program/West African Network for Peacebuilding (WIPNET/WANEP).[5] She also served as the commissioner-designate for the Liberia Truth and Reconciliation Commission.  For the 2013–2015 academic years, she is a Distinguished Fellow in Social Justice at Barnard College of Columbia University.[13] In 2013, she became an Oxfam Global Ambassador.[14]secondnameplaceholder speaks internationally to advance women's rights, and peace and security. In 2016, secondnameplaceholder spoke at a protest march organized by Women Wage Peace, a political grassroots group working to advance a peace agreement between Israel and Palestine.[15]secondnameplaceholder is also an outspoken supporter of fellow Liberian Ebenezer Norman's non-profit organization A New Dimension of Hope, a foundation which builds schools in Liberia. In May 2015, she wrote personal letters to the contributors of NDhope's crowd-funding campaign on Indiegogo and has spoken at their events.[16][17][18][19]As of April 2017, secondnameplaceholder is also Executive Director of the Women of Peace and Security Program at AC4, Earth Institute, Columbia University.[20]secondnameplaceholder is also a contributor at The Daily Beast.[21][22]In the spring of 1999, after secondnameplaceholder had been at the Trauma Healing project for a year,[5]:95 her supervisor, Reverend Bartholomew Bioh "BB" Colley, a pastor of the Lutheran Church in Liberia, introduced her to Samuel Gbaydee Doe (no relation to the former Liberian president by the same first and last name),[5]:98 a "passionate and intelligent"[5]:107 Liberian who had just earned a master's degree from a Christian university in the U.S. that specialized in peace-building studies.[23] Doe was the executive director of Africa's first regional peace organization, the West Africa Network for Peacebuilding (WANEP),[24] which he had co-founded in 1998 in Ghana.[25][26] Encouraged by the Lutheran reverend she calls "BB", secondnameplaceholder began reading widely in the field of peacebuilding, notably reading The Politics of Jesus by Mennonite theologian John Howard Yoder, and works by "Martin Luther King Jr. and Gandhi and the Kenyan author and conflict and reconciliation expert Hizkias Assefa."[5]:88By late 1999, "WANEP was actively seeking to involve women in its work and I was invited to a conference in Ghana," wrote secondnameplaceholder.[5]:101 At a follow-up WANEP conference in October 2000, secondnameplaceholder met Thelma Ekiyor of Nigeria, who was "well educated, a lawyer who specialized in alternative dispute resolution."[5]:107–108 Ekiyor told secondnameplaceholder of her idea of approaching WANEP to start a women's organization. "Thelma was a thinker, a visionary, like BB and Sam. But she was a woman, like me."[5]:109Within a year, Ekiyor had secured funding from WANEP and had organized the first meeting of the Women in Peacebuilding Network (WIPNET) in Accra, Ghana, which secondnameplaceholder attended:In the sympathetic setting of other women hungry for peace, secondnameplaceholder told the painful parts of her life story for the first time, including sleeping on the floor of a hospital corridor with her newborn baby for a week because she had no money to pay the bill and nobody to help her.[5]:113 "No one else in Africa was doing this: focusing only on women and only on building peace."[5]:113 Ekiyor became secondnameplaceholder's trainer and friend. She also was the one who announced the launch of WIPNET in Liberia and named secondnameplaceholder as coordinator of Liberian Women's Initiative.[5]:114–115 secondnameplaceholder's "peace-church" philosophical orientation likely can be traced to this era – Thelma Ekiyor, Rev. "BB" Colley, Samuel Gbaydee Doe, and Hizkias Assefa are all connected to Eastern Mennonite University in the United States, either as former students or (in Assefa's case) as an ongoing professor.[27]In the spring of 2002, secondnameplaceholder was spending her days employed in trauma-healing work and her evenings as the unpaid leader of WIPNET in Liberia. Her children, now including an adopted daughter named Lucia "Malou" (bringing the number of children to five), were living in Ghana under her sister's care.[5]:148 Falling asleep in the WIPNET office one night, she awoke from a dream where she says God had told her, "Gather the women and pray for peace!"[5]:122 Some friends helped her to understand that the dream was not meant for others, as secondnameplaceholder thought; instead, she realized that it was a necessary for her to act upon it herself.[5]:122[28]Following a WIPNET training session in Liberia,[5]:124 secondnameplaceholder and her allies, including a Mandingo-Muslim woman named Asatu, began by "going to the mosques on Friday at noon after prayers, to the markets on Saturday morning, to two churches every Sunday."[5]:126 Their flyers read: "We are tired! We are tired of our children being killed! We are tired of being abused!! Women, wake up – you have a voice in the peace process!" They also handed out simple drawings explaining their purpose to the many women who couldn't read.[5]:127By the summer of 2002, secondnameplaceholder was recognized as the spokeswoman and inspirational leader of the Women of Liberia Mass Action for Peace, described as a peace movement that started with local women praying and singing in a fish market.[29] Working across religious and ethnic lines, secondnameplaceholder led thousands of Christian and Muslim women to gather in  Monrovia for months. They prayed for peace, using Muslim and Christian prayers, and eventually held daily nonviolent demonstrations and sit-ins in defiance of orders from the tyrannical president at that time, Charles Taylor.[5]:128,135They staged protests that included the threat of a curse and a sex strike. Of the strike, secondnameplaceholder says, "The [sex] strike lasted, on and off, for a few months. It had little or no practical effect, but it was extremely valuable in getting us media attention."[5]:147 In a highly risky move, the women finally occupied a field that had been used for soccer; it was beside Tubman Boulevard, the route Charles Taylor traveled twice a day, to and from Capitol Hill.[5]:136 To make themselves more recognizable as a group, all of the women wore T-shirts that were white, signifying peace, with the WIPNET logo and white hair ties.[5]:136 Taylor finally granted a hearing for the women on April 23, 2003. With more than 2,000 women amassed outside his executive mansion, secondnameplaceholder was the person designated to make their case to him.[5]:140 secondnameplaceholder positioned her face to be seen by Taylor but directed her words to Grace Minor, the president of the senate and the only female government official present:In her book, secondnameplaceholder reveals that Grace Minor quietly "gave a great deal of her own money... at enormous personal risk" to the women's protest movement.[5]:149 The protesting women extracted a promise from President Charles Taylor to attend peace talks in Ghana to negotiate with the rebels from Liberians United for Reconciliation and Democracy[30][31] and another newer rebel group, MODEL.[5]:155In June 2003, secondnameplaceholder led a delegation of Liberian women to Ghana to put pressure on the warring factions during the peace-talk process.[32] At first the women sat in a daily demonstration outside the posh hotels where the negotiators met, pressuring for progress in the talks.[5]:154–156 When the talks dragged from early June through late July, with no progress made and violence continuing in Liberia, secondnameplaceholder led dozens of women, eventually swelling to a couple hundred, inside the hotel, where they simply "dropped down, in front of the glass door that was the main entrance to the meeting room."[5]:161 They held signs that said: "Butchers and murderers of the Liberian people -- STOP!"[5]:161 secondnameplaceholder passed a message to the lead mediator, General Abubakar (a former president of Nigeria), that the women would interlock their arms and remain seated in the hallway, holding the delegates "hostage" until a peace agreement was reached. Abubakar, who proved to be sympathetic to the women, announced with some amusement: "The peace hall has been seized by General firstnameplaceholder and her troops." When the men tried to leave the hall, firstnameplaceholder and her allies threatened to rip their clothes off: "In Africa, it's a terrible curse to see a married or elderly woman deliberately bare herself."[5]:162 With Abubakar's support, the women remained sitting outside the negotiating room during the following days, ensuring that the "atmosphere at the peace talks changed from circuslike to somber."[5]:163The Liberian war ended officially weeks later, with the signing of the Accra Comprehensive Peace Agreement on August 18, 2003.[5]:164[33] "But what we [women] did marked the beginning of the end."[5]:163In addition to helping bring an end to 14 years of warfare in Liberia, this women's movement led to the 2005 election of Ellen Johnson Sirleaf as president of Liberia, the first elected woman leader of a country in Africa. Sirleaf is co-recipient of the 2011 Nobel Peace Prize along with secondnameplaceholder and Tawakel Karman. The three were awarded the prize "for their non-violent struggle for the safety of women and for women's rights to full participation in peace-building work."[2] In Sirleaf's re-election campaign of 2011, secondnameplaceholder endorsed her.[34]Recognizable when wearing their white WIPNET T-shirts, secondnameplaceholder and the other Liberian women activists were treated as national heroines by Liberians in the streets for weeks following the signing of the Accra Comprehensive Peace Agreement.[5]:167 Yet secondnameplaceholder wrote of their unceasing nervousness about the fragility of the peace they had helped birth:secondnameplaceholder expressed particular concern for the "psychic damage" borne by Liberians:In an interview for the International Women's Day, secondnameplaceholder also expressed:Amid the destruction and unending needs, secondnameplaceholder was appalled by the arrogance, ignorance and overall cultural insensitivity of the United Nations agencies dispatched to help disarm the country, keep the peace, establish procedures for democratic governance, and initiate rebuilding efforts. "People who have lived through a terrible conflict may be hungry and desperate, but they're not stupid (secondnameplaceholder's emphasis). They often have very good ideas about how peace can evolve, and they need to be asked."[5]:171 secondnameplaceholder advocated for involving Liberian civil society, especially women's organizations, in restoring the country. She grew frustrated with the way the "UN was spending many millions of dollars in Liberia, but most of it was on [their own] staffing resources.... If they had just given some of that money to the local people, it would have made a real difference."[5]:173By the late fall and winter of 2003-04, "the world of conflict resolution, peace-building and the global women's movement" was calling secondnameplaceholder to write papers, come to conferences and otherwise explain the experience and views of WIPNET. Thelma Ekiyor encouraged secondnameplaceholder to overcome her lack of self-esteem among "highly intelligent people who held master's degrees and represented powerful institutions" by reading and studying further to understand the theories circulating in the world of peacebuilding.[5]:177 She read The Peace Book by Louise Diamond, known for advocating multi-track diplomacy, and The Journey Toward Reconciliation and The Little Book of Conflict Transformation, both written by John Paul Lederach, the founding director of the Center for Justice and Peacebuilding at Eastern Mennonite University.[5]:177 She went to a USAID conference in New York, her first trip out of Africa,[5]:174–175 to a conference in South Africa, and to Switzerland where she dealt with the Nigerian in charge of UN programs in Liberia.[5]:174–176In the late spring of 2004, about eight months after the Ghana-Accra Comprehensive Peace Agreement was signed, secondnameplaceholder made a decision to take college-level courses in the field in which she had been working: "I'd heard about Eastern Mennonite University (EMU), an American college with a well-known program in peace-building and conflict resolution. It was a Christian school that emphasized community and service; it had a long-standing relationship with WANEP and a history of recruiting Africans to study there."[5]:178 Her first stint at EMU – four weeks at its annual Summer Peacebuilding Institute – were "a transformative time for me."[5]:178secondnameplaceholder studied with Hizkias Assefa, whose writings she had read five years earlier when she first began working for St. Peter's Lutheran Church on trauma healing. She also studied with Howard Zehr, "who taught me the concept of restorative justice," whereby healing occurred through the joint efforts of victims and offenders to repair the harms done.[5]:178  She thought restorative justice was particularly applicable to Africa: "Restorative justice was...something we could see as ours and not artificially imposed by Westerners. And we needed it, needed that return to tradition. A culture of impunity flourished throughout Africa. People, officials, governments did evil but were never held accountable. More than we needed to punish them, we needed to undo the damage they had done.... When I left EMU, I knew there was more here for me. Somehow I would find a way to come back."[5]:178–179She returned for a round-table called Strategies for Trauma Healing and Resilience in the summer of 2005 and then enrolled as a residential, full-time master's degree student in "conflict transformation and peacebuilding" at EMU's Center for Justice and Peacebuilding in 2006-07:[27]In September 2006, just as secondnameplaceholder was embarking on her first full semester of graduate school, she went to New York City to address the UN on the occasion of the fifth anniversary of the passage of Resolution 1325, which dealt with protecting women from gender-based violence and involving them in UN-linked peace efforts.[5]:179 While in New York, she received a call from Abigail Disney, a descendant of the founders of the Walt Disney Company, a feminist, and a philanthropist. Disney and a collaborator, Gini Reticker, wanted to talk with secondnameplaceholder about their desire to make a documentary about how the women of Liberia rallied themselves to force the men to stop battling.[5]:212During 2006-07 secondnameplaceholder also began talking with Ekiyor and Ecoma Alaga (a Nigerian, like Ekiyor) about splitting WIPNET from WANEP, believing the parent organization to be controlled financially by men and wanting the three of them to be fully in charge.[5]:187 The founding director of WANEP, secondnameplaceholder's old friend Sam Gbaydee Doe, was sympathetic to the three women's desire for structural independence, but he had left WANEP to pursue a PhD in England.[5]:189 WANEP was now led by another graduate of the MA in conflict transformation program at EMU, Emmanuel Bombande of Ghana,[36] who did not agree that the three women owned the WIPNET branch of WANEP and thus would not let it spin off.[5]:188–189 As a result, secondnameplaceholder and her two colleagues started a new organization, Women in Peace and Security Network (WIPSEN), also based in Accra, Ghana."[5]:189[37] Abigail Disney stepped up to help secondnameplaceholder raise funds for launching WIPSEN among philanthropists in New York, enabling her to secure $50,000 in seed money.[5]:202By the time secondnameplaceholder finished her coursework at EMU on April 30, 2007, and returned to her children in Liberia in May 2007 – where her parents had been caring for them – she realized that her nine months away "nearly broke all of us."[5]:194 In Virginia, she had lived with "a cold that never went away" and she "felt panic, sadness, and cold, swirling blackness" as she faced "being sued by former friends at WANEP over our desire to move in a new direction."[5]:200–201 Her impending graduate degree (conferred at the end of 2007), growing fame, and other changes in her life strained the relationship she had with a Liberian man named Tunde, an employee of international agencies who had functioned as a father figure for her children for a decade, from the early period of the Liberian women's peace movement through secondnameplaceholder's graduate studies at EMU[5]:203–204 (for which he had paid the tuition[5]:198). They broke up and by early 2008 secondnameplaceholder was in a relationship with a Liberian information technology expert whom she identifies as James.[5]:205–205 He is the father of her sixth child, a daughter named Jaydyn Thelma Abigail, born in New York City on June 2, 2009.[5]:223In April 2008, when secondnameplaceholder's family and friends gathered to celebrate the 14th birthday of her eldest daughter, Amber, it was clear that secondnameplaceholder had developed a serious alcohol problem. In her memoir, secondnameplaceholder explains that she had turned to alcohol for about a decade to cope with the loneliness of constant separations from her family, the strain of poverty and war-engendered trauma she suffered from, and the stress of never-ending demands on her time. During Amber's birthday party, secondnameplaceholder's children noted that she drank 14 glasses of wine. The next day, she passed out. When again conscious, suffering from an ulcer, she begged James to take her to the doctor: "Then I saw the kids gathered around us, their terrified, helpless faces. After all their losses, this would be the final one. No. Not possible. It might sound too easy, but that was the end for me. I still don't sleep easily and I still wake up too early, but I don't drink anymore."[5]:208–209
<h2>Religious views</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, during the Liberian Civil War used religion and spirituality as part of their techniques that helped ended the war. She expressed her usage of religious songs, traditional songs, and other songs that was sung by her women counterparts, Muslim women. After her Nobel Prize winning in 2011, she did multiple interviews, specifying the importance of her inclusion and determination in using religion as the stepping stone for achieving peace in Liberia. On October 6th, 2016, secondnameplaceholder did an interview with Harvard Divinity Schools, speaking on her topic "Women as Catalysts for Local and Global Spiritually-Engaged Movements for Sustainable Peace."firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder used religion and spirituality as strategies to rally women for ending Liberia’s two civil wars . Tactics that she used such as religious and traditional songs to help create a bonding community with her women. Throughout her memoir, Mighty Be Our Powers: How Sisterhood, Prayer, and Sex Changed a Nation at War; a Memoir, One can perceive the influence of her religious beliefs on initiatives for restoring peace in Liberia. After the second civil war broke out in 1999, increasing the already existing problem of rape and systematic brutality in Liberia, secondnameplaceholder felt the need for an inter-religious call for action.[38] In response to this second wave of deadly conflict, secondnameplaceholder formed an inter-religious peace building coalition of Christian and Muslim women, which lead to the uproar of the Liberia Mass Action for Peace Movement.[39] With her involvement in these powerful settings, secondnameplaceholder gained a great amount of leadership skills in which she combined with her religious background. During the LMAPM, she along with other women activists, formed multiple pray-ins, using it as a form of nonviolent protest. These pray-ins called for reconciliation and demanded concrete actions to end the war during peace talks around West Africa.[39] secondnameplaceholder, along with many other women, such as Thelma Ekiyor, combined religion and traditional practices to define their approach to conflict transformation, peace building, and security.[40]secondnameplaceholder’s faith  has had a tremendous impact on her personal and professional life.  Prayer is a recurrent theme in her memoir and talks. Although her memoir depicts instances of loss, pain, grief, and disappointment that made her question her faith, she indicates that prayer has been an intrinsic part of her journey in  peace building. She writes, “God is ever faithful, ever loving; he listens to our prayers.”[5] She used prayer as a source of protection,  hope, and guidance in her activist work. secondnameplaceholder perceive Christianity to be very self-serving and crucial to the social and cultural realities of the Liberian people . secondnameplaceholder believes that for adequate results to be seen in conflict situations, especially the ones in which she was involved in, prayer had to occupy center stage. This is a central characteristic of her identity as a global activist as it is an important part of her work. Being involved in groups such as the Christian Women’s Peace Initiative (CWI), helped her to embody this part of her faith into bringing peace and teaching peace to others over the past year.[39]Religion influenced her approach to peace building as a type of mothering. In fact, secondnameplaceholder engages the often marginalized voices of women and young men who bear the brunt of war. secondnameplaceholder has used religion to achieve many of her activist roles throughout her traveling career and teaching in healing spaces. An important role that she and other powerful women such as Ekiyor, used religion as a support tool to mother those who have been traumatized, searching for peace within their communities, their homes, and their country.[5] Praying had always been a part of secondnameplaceholder’s life, especially in her romantic life. Using prayer for her was a healing tool that helped her overcome her abusive relationships and protect her children. One aspect of secondnameplaceholder using religion and faith as a form of mothering is by using it as a resource to help whoever she is helping feel connected. She used her faith and beliefs, especially the bible to help them understand their shared experiences and trauma.  In September 2016, secondnameplaceholder did an interview at the Harvard Divinity School on “Religion and The Practice of Peace.” She points out that Religion and spirituality were common aspects in the lives of the women who participated in the Liberian Women’s Mass Action for Peace. These spiritual encounters are what she used in her community to mobilize and empower women to take action in all aspects of their lives, whether personal, spiritual, or political.  In the Harvard interview, she states:“In our group the first thing we did was to hold three days of consultative meetings. The first day we brought only Christian women, and we went back into the Bible to find those things in the Bible that women did. We wanted to really show them (Christian women) that God had a way of using women and that there’s a place for women in turning around the history of their nations. So, we took them to the Bible, and we used women of faith as examples—Esther, Deborah, Rahab the Prostitute—who had done great things to turn the tide. We used those women as the springboard for really mobilizing women.”[41]Religion and the bible enabled secondnameplaceholder to convey her vision to Liberian women with different creeds. In order to build stronger communities for peace-building and promoting activism included the containment of other religious groups, which is a big part of the Women’s movement’s success. However, for secondnameplaceholder, building a stronger community amongst women that will put them at the forefront of such a major movement for the end of wars and not limiting her beliefs to just Christianity, is a tactic she encouraged. In the Harvard interview again, she states that:“The second thing we did was to bring the Muslim women together and go through the same process, but with the Qur’an...We would talk and read some of the descriptions that talk about how to treat women better and live a nonviolent life…”[41]Using faith as a common denominator amongst all women, helped them to create a closer leadership bond. secondnameplaceholder came from a mixed religious and spiritual community where her parents were Christians, but their close friends and neighbors were Muslims. Using religion to bring young people together, especially for young girls and women, became a motive and a goal for secondnameplaceholder to help breed leadership and women empowerment skills through her activism, creating new leaders for the future.secondnameplaceholder had worked in multiple healing spaces, for example, the Trauma Healing Office, where she traveled around Liberia to different communities, trying to educate people on how to deal with their traumas. She felt as if this is her calling from God.[5] Because of the severity of the war and her trying to provide for her family, keeping a strong faith is used to help provide comfort through her work, especially since her target is towards weakened women and young boys who have been a part of the destructive process against their wills. Through her activism work in her communities in Liberia, it is fueled by her experiences at home. She is not able to mother her children the way she wanted, and to her, apart from her children, not losing faith is most important for her. People whom she had helped in both Liberia and Ghana referred to her as being “Big Mama” or “Mother of Peace.”[5]Religion and spirituality for secondnameplaceholder are considered essential in the peace coalition and the healing of everyone and everywhere. She believes that to overcome injustices that take over people's livelihood and the way they live their day to day lives, it calls for true believers.[42] Being a religious person in these settings, for secondnameplaceholder, revenge is not the way to go. She recounts reading the bible and searching for different accounts that encourage peace and not an “eye for an eye.”[42] For secondnameplaceholder, religion and its relevance helps to teach compassion and practice forgiveness which had also contributed to the success of her activism work.[42][43] Working with angered people who had dealt with social and political trauma, forgiveness became a part of the healing process and education for her intended audiences. To secondnameplaceholder, forgiveness does not have a specific religious practice attached to it, but multiple. She mentions at a peace conference that, “In my life’s journey, it hasn’t been just Christians who have reached out to me. It hasn’t been just Muslims. It has been people of different faiths.”[42]In terms of her contributions to the conceptions of violence, she also used her faith to push emphasis on why non-violence approaches are important. This is especially prominent in the Women’s movement and her involvement while working with the Women in Peace-building Network (WIPNET).[44] The way she used helped break apart the comfortability of violence amongst people who are vulnerable is by using vulnerable people. She used women who are also strong in faith and who have struggles with close contact with acts of violence although all were in a larger sense. Many of the women that were active with secondnameplaceholder, faced violence such as sexual, physical, emotional, mental, and physical forces. Traditional religious songs and dances were used in the non-violent, healing, and peace. These dances and songs are used as a form of storytelling.secondnameplaceholder expresses devotion to her Christian faith. She opened the acknowledgment section of her memoir with these words: "All praise, glory and honor to God for His unfailing love and favor toward me."[5]:245 She told students attending an EMU chapel in 2009:secondnameplaceholder told the EMU students that she went from being an angry, broke, virtually homeless, 25-year-old mother of four children with no idea of what her future might be, to listening to the voice of God in 1997. She said God spoke to her through a five-year-old boy, a son whom she had nicknamed Nuku. Comments made by Nuku made her realize that she had succumbed to "crippling hopelessness", and that her low self-esteem and sense of helplessness were destroying her family, which was already under assault from Liberia's brutal warfare. secondnameplaceholder said she began taking one tiny step at a time, asking for God's help with each step. And that God sent her angels in the form of human beings who reached out a hand at just the moment when she was most desperate.[28]As suggested by the interfaith character of the Liberian women's movement, secondnameplaceholder noted that others may derive the same support from religious faiths different from hers:In an interview with Odyssey Networks, secondnameplaceholder said that God could also be referred to as a "Higher Power." She stressed that with a Higher Power accompanying you, you can "rise up and do something to change your situation." She advised: "Don't wait for a Gandhi, don't wait for a King, don't wait for a Mandela. You are your own Mandela, you are your own Gandhi, you are your own King."[45]
<h2>Documentary film</h2>
secondnameplaceholder is the narrator and central character in the 2008 documentary film Pray the Devil Back to Hell, which consists of scores of film and audio clips from the war period. It took Best Documentary Feature in the 2008 Tribeca Film Festival in New York. It has been broadcast across the United States as part of the "Women, War & Peace" series, which aired over five successive Tuesdays in October and early November 2011 on public television stations.[46] Pray has been used as an advocacy tool in conflict and post-conflict zones, such as Bosnia, Afghanistan, Iraq, South Africa, Rwanda, Mexico, Kenya, Cambodia, Russia, Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the West Bank: "The reaction was remarkably similar: no matter how different the country and the society, women recognized themselves and started talking about how they could unite to solve their own problems."[47][5]:214In the documentary, secondnameplaceholder emerges as someone able to laugh and enjoy life, despite what she has lived through: "secondnameplaceholder comes across as a sharply strategic, scrappy, political maestro interfaith mobilizer of merriment. Not the balloons-confetti-cupcakes-clown-type fun, but rather solidarity-inspiring conviviality. You see women dancing, singing, smiling, wearing beautiful, white-as-doves clothing, and you even see laughter during sit-ins and protests."[48]
<h2>Awards and recognitions</h2>
secondnameplaceholder's exposure to the New York philanthropic social set, facilitated by Disney (who had become a close friend),[3] opened the door for a series of awards. The first, from the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard, came in early 2006, and then they began to arrive in accelerated fashion: recognition by Women's eNews, the Gruber Prize for Women's Rights, the John F. Kennedy Profile in Courage Award, the Living Legends Award for Service to Humanity, and several more. In July 2011, EMU announced that secondnameplaceholder had been named its "Alumna of the Year".[49] (secondnameplaceholder's eldest son, Joshua "Nuku" Mensah, entered EMU as a freshman in 2010, overlapping by one year with Sam Gbaydee Doe's eldest daughter, Samfee Doe, then a senior.)[27] The crowning honor came in October 2011 when the Norwegian Nobel Committee made secondnameplaceholder one of three female recipients of the 2011 Nobel Peace Prize.
<h2>Personal life</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was born on 7 February 1979 in Shara'b As Salam, Taiz Governorate, Yemen.[13] She grew up near Taiz, which is the third largest city in Yemen and is described as a place of learning in a conservative country.[14] She studied in Taiz. She is the daughter of Abdel Salam secondnameplaceholder, a lawyer and politician, who once served and later resigned as Legal Affairs Minister in Ali Abdullah Saleh's government.[11] She is the sister of Tariq secondnameplaceholder, who is a poet,[15] and Safa secondnameplaceholder, who is a lawyer and the first Yemeni citizen to graduate from Harvard Law School. Safa is also a journalist and works as a journalist for Al-Jazeera.[16] She is married to Mohammed al-Nahmi[8][17] and is the mother of three children.[18]secondnameplaceholder earned an undergraduate degree in commerce from the University of Science and Technology, a graduate degree in political science from the University of Sana'a.[14][16] In 2012, she received an Honorary Doctorate in International Law from University of Alberta in Canada.[19][20]At a protest in 2010, a woman attempted to stab her with a jambiya but secondnameplaceholder's supporters managed to stop the assault.[17][21]According to Tariq secondnameplaceholder, "a senior Yemeni official" threatened his sister firstnameplaceholder with death in a telephone call on 26 January 2011 if she continued her public protests.[22] According to Dexter Filkins, writing in The New Yorker, the official was President Saleh.[15]The Turkish government offered her Turkish citizenship and she received her citizenship documents from the Turkish foreign minister on 11 October 2012.[1][23][24]In 2019, firstnameplaceholder was honoured with the Social Entrepreneur of the Year at The Asian Awards.[25]Like many Yemenis, secondnameplaceholder was forced to leave her country after the capital's takeover by Houthi rebels amid the deteriorating security situation.From her new home in Istanbul, secondnameplaceholder continues to speak out against injustices committed in Yemen, including the war waged by the Saudi-UAE-led coalition and US drone attacks in her homeland.[26]On 17 December 2020, secondnameplaceholder said that her home and office were raided by Houthis and took control of them after stealing furniture.[27]
<h2>Women Journalists Without Chains</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder co-founded the human rights group Women Journalists Without Chains (WJWC) with seven other female journalists in 2005 in order to promote human rights, "particularly freedom of opinion and expression, and democratic rights."[28] Although it was founded as "Female Reporters Without Borders," the present name was adopted in order to get a government license.[29] secondnameplaceholder has said she has received "threats and temptations" and was the target of harassment from the Yemeni authorities by telephone and letter because of her refusal to accept the Ministry of Information's rejection of WJWC's application to legally create a newspaper and a radio station. The group advocated freedom for SMS news services, which had been tightly controlled by the government despite not falling under the purview of the Press Law of 1990. After a governmental review of the text services, the only service that was not granted a license to continue was Bilakoyood, which belonged to WJWC and had operated for a year.[15][30] In 2007, WJWC released a report that documented Yemeni abuses of press freedom since 2005.[30] In 2009, she criticised the Ministry of Information for establishing trials that targeted journalists.[11] From 2007 to 2010, secondnameplaceholder regularly led demonstrations and sit-ins in Tahrir Square, Sana'a.[3][31]firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was affiliated with the Al-Thawrah newspaper at the time she founded WJWC in March 2005.[28] She is also a member of the Yemeni Journalists' Syndicate.[32]
<h2>Political positions</h2>
secondnameplaceholder started protests as an advocate for press freedoms in her country. At a time when she was advocating for more press freedom, she responded to the Jyllands-Posten Muhammad cartoons controversy in 2005 by writing: "We are not to call for tyranny and bans on freedom."[29][33]She stopped wearing the traditional niqab in favour of more colourful hijabs that showed her face. She first appeared without the niqab at a conference in 2004.[11] secondnameplaceholder replaced the niqab for the scarf in public on national television to make her point that the full covering is cultural and not dictated by Islam.[34][35] She told the Yemen Times in 2010 that:[11]She has alleged that many Yemeni girls suffer from malnutrition so that boys could be fed and also called attention to high illiteracy rates: two-thirds of Yemeni women are unable to read.[36] advocating for laws that would prevent females younger than 17 from being married. In a statement made to Human Rights Watch, a human rights research and advocacy group, she stated that Yemen's revolution "didn't happen just to solve political problems, but also to address societal problems, the most important being child marriage."[37] Despite most members of her party holding a different view on child marriage than her, she claims her party is the most open to women. In clarifying her position, she said:[38]She has also led protests against government corruption. Her stand on the ouster of Saleh became stronger after village lands of families around the city of Ibb were appropriated by a corrupt local leader.[17][21] Likewise, she says she remains independent from foreign influences: "I do have close strategic ties with American organizations involved in protecting human rights, with American ambassadors and with officials in the U.S. State Department. (I also have ties with activists in) most of the E.U. and Arab countries. But they are ties among equals; (I am not) their subordinate."[16] Speaking before an audience at the University of Michigan, secondnameplaceholder summed up her belief: "I am a citizen of the world. The Earth is my country, and humanity is my nation."[39]As a response to the 2012–13 Egyptian protests and the 2013 Egyptian coup d'état, secondnameplaceholder was supportive of protests demanding Egyptian president Mohamed Morsi's resignation on 30 June, but was critical of the military's decision to oust Morsi, suspend the Constitution of Egypt and bar the Muslim Brotherhood from participating in Egyptian politics, citing that Morsi was Egypt's first democratically elected leader, the constitution was supported by 60% of people who voted in a public referendum and that the coup may cause people to lose faith in democracy, allowing extremist groups to thrive.[40][41] She attempted to enter Egypt to join protests against the coup but was banned from doing so by the Egyptian military for "security reasons" and was deported back to Sana'a.[42] She later denounced the military's arrests of high-ranking Muslim Brotherhood officials and the military's use of violence on protesters at sites occupied primarily by Morsi's supporters.[43]secondnameplaceholder routinely speaks out against both the Houthi insurgency in Yemen and Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, calling both of them threats to Yemen's national sovereignty. She has condemned the groups for what she says are their efforts to destabilize the country and overthrow the Yemeni government. She has accused the Houthis of receiving foreign aid from the Iranian government and objects to what she believes are foreign efforts to leave the Houthis alone since they are also fighting against Al-Qaeda. After the announcement of Houthi integration into the Yemeni military, secondnameplaceholder stated that there shouldn't be integration if the Houthis are unwilling to surrender their weapons.[44] As a response to the January 2015 events of the 2014–15 Yemeni coup d'état, she spoke out on what she believes is collaboration between former president Saleh and the Houthi rebels to undo the 2011 revolution by ending the transition process.[45] Despite the civil war, secondnameplaceholder remains optimistic for her country's future. "It's very sad, all this killing, all this war," secondnameplaceholder said in an interview with the Journal of Middle Eastern Politics and Policy in 2016. "But at the same time, we don't lose our hope, and we don't lose our vision, and we don't lose our dream."secondnameplaceholder often objects to U.S. drone policy in Yemen, calling the use of them "unacceptable" and has argued that using them in populated areas violates human rights and international laws.[46] Following an increase in the number of drone strikes in August 2013, she called for an immediate halt of all strikes, proclaiming that the bombings undermine Yemen's sovereignty and contribute to increases in Al-Qaeda recruits in the country.[46]secondnameplaceholder condemned the Saudi-led intervention in Yemen, stating: "Unfortunately, this coalition deals with this war just as a battle to fire bombs and throw missiles, ignoring the consequences." She called for an "immediate cessation" of air strikes by the coalition.[47]
<h2>2011 protests</h2>
During the 2011 Yemeni protests, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder organised student rallies in Sana'a in protest against the long-standing rule of Saleh's government. On 22 January, she was stopped while driving with her husband by three plain-clothed men without police identification and taken to prison,[15][22] where she was held for 36 hours until she was released on parole on 24 January. In a 9 April editorial that appeared in The Guardian, she wrote:[48]She then led another protest on 29 January where she called for a "Day of Rage" on 3 February[12] similar to events of the 2011 Egyptian revolution that were in turn inspired by the 2010–2011 Tunisian revolution. On 17 March, she was re-arrested amidst ongoing protests.[49] Speaking of the uprising she had said that: "We will continue until the fall of Ali Abdullah Saleh's regime...We have the Southern Movement in the south, the (Shia) Huthi rebels in the north, and parliamentary opposition...But what's most important now is the jasmine revolution."[12] She has set at the protest camp for months along with her husband.[8]secondnameplaceholder explained the reasons why the Yemeni protests attracted Yemenis: "The combination of a dictatorship, corruption, poverty and unemployment has created this revolution. It's like a volcano. Injustice and corruption are exploding while opportunities for a good life are coming to an end."[50]secondnameplaceholder has had some tense disagreements with other organisers, especially after she urged protesters to march to the Presidential Palace in May as a response to the killing of 13 protesters by security forces.[6]On 18 June she wrote an article entitled "Yemen's Unfinished Revolution" in the New York Times in which she assailed the United States and Saudi Arabia for their support for the "corrupt" Saleh regime in Yemen because they "used their influence to ensure that members of the old regime remain in power and the status quo is maintained." She argued that American intervention in Yemen was motivated by the war on terror and was not responsive to either the human rights abuses in Yemen or the calls from Yemen's democracy movement. She affirmed that the protesters in Yemen also wanted stability in the country and region.[18] In an interview on Democracy Now!, secondnameplaceholder said, "In our weekly protests in front of the cabinet, we called on the government to allow people to have freedom of speech and for people to be able to own online newspapers. We knew and know that freedom of speech is the door to democracy and justice, and also that part of the freedom of speech is the freedom of movement... The culture of freedom and protests spread all over Yemen. Every time we stood up for our rights the government answered with violence or interfered in our rights...." She credited Tunisia for inspiring others around the Middle East for the Arab Spring protests.[51]During the protests, secondnameplaceholder was part of a large number of women activists—up to 30 percent of the protestors—demanding change in Yemen.[52] On 16 October, government snipers in Taiz shot and killed Aziza Othman Kaleb, CNN reported she was the first woman to have been killed during the Yemen protests but could not verify this claim.[53] Ten days later, women in Sana'a protested against the violent force used against them by burning their makrama.[54][55] At the time, secondnameplaceholder was in Washington, D.C., where she said the female protesters who burned their makrama were "reject(ing) the injustice that the Saleh regime has imposed on them. And this is a new stage for the Yemeni women, because they will not hide behind veils or behind walls or anything else."[56]After the Nobel Peace Prize announcement, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder became increasingly involved in mobilizing world opinion and United Nations Security Council members to assist the protesters in ousting Saleh and bringing him before the international court.She lobbied the United Nations Security Council and the United States not to make a deal that would pardon Saleh, but instead hold him accountable, freeze his assets and support the protesters. The United Nations Security Council voted 15–0 on 21 October on United Nations Security Council Resolution 2014 that "strongly condemns" Saleh's government for the use of deadly force against protesters, but it also backed the Gulf Cooperation Council's (GCC) initiative that would give Saleh immunity from prosecution should he resign. secondnameplaceholder, who was present for the vote, criticised the council's support for the GCC's proposal and instead advocated that Saleh stand trial at the International Criminal Court.[57]secondnameplaceholder also met the United States' Secretary of State Hillary Clinton on 28 October to discuss the same United Nations Resolution, to which Clinton said "the United States supports a democratic transition in Yemen and the rights of the people of Yemen – men and women – to choose their own leaders and futures."[56][58] secondnameplaceholder responded to the comment through the Yemini press by saying, "in Yemen, it has been nine months that people have been camped in the squares. Until now we didn't see that Obama came to value the sacrifice of the Yemeni people. Instead the American administration is giving guarantees to Saleh."[59]Saleh signed the Gulf Cooperation Council's plan 23 November 2011 in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Saleh would transfer his powers to Vice President Abd al-Rab Mansur al-Hadi to start a political transition, according to the terms of the agreement.[60]
<h2>2011 Nobel Peace Prize</h2>
secondnameplaceholder became the first Arab woman, the youngest person at that time to have become a Nobel Peace Laureate and the category's second Muslim woman.[61] At 32, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was then the youngest winner of a Nobel Peace Prize. She is younger (born 7 February 1979) than Mairead Maguire (born 27 January 1944), who was a co-recipient of the award in 1976 and previously held that record.[62] In 2014, Malala Yousafzai, age 17, displaced secondnameplaceholder as the youngest winner ever. In 2003, Shirin Ebadi was the first Persian woman and first Muslim woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize. secondnameplaceholder was the third female journalist awarded the Nobel after Bertha von Suttner in 1905 and Emily Greene Balch in 1946. Before the 2011 Nobel Peace Prize was announced, only 12 other women had ever been recipients in its 110 years, and after the presentation there were 15 women.secondnameplaceholder, along with Ellen Johnson Sirleaf and Leymah Gbowee, were the co-recipients of the 2011 Nobel Peace Prize "for their non-violent struggle for the safety of women and for women's rights to full participation in peace-building work."[63] Of secondnameplaceholder, the Nobel Committee said: "In the most trying circumstances, both before and during the 'Arab spring', Tawakkul secondnameplaceholder has played a leading part in the struggle for women's rights and for democracy and peace in Yemen."[63][64] The Nobel Committee cited the United Nations Security Council Resolution 1325, adopted in 2000, which states that women and children suffer great harm from war and political instability and that women must have a larger influence and role in peacemaking activities; it also "[c]alls on all actors involved, when negotiating and implementing peace agreements, to adopt a gender perspective."[65]Upon announcing the award, the committee chairman Thorbjørn Jagland said: "We cannot achieve democracy and lasting peace in the world unless women obtain the same opportunities as men to influence developments at all levels of society." He later added that the prize was "a very important signal to women all over the world"[66] and that, despite the events of the Arab Spring, "there are many other positive developments in the world that we have looked at. I think it is a little strange that researchers and others have not seen them." He had earlier said the prize for the year would be "very powerful... but at the same time very unifying [and would] not create as strong reactions from a single country as it did last year [with Liu Xiaobo]." The 2011 prize is to be divided equally among the three recipients,[63] from a total of 10 million Swedish kronor.[66][67]In reaction to the award secondnameplaceholder, while camped out in Sana'a during ongoing anti-government protests, said: "I didn't expect it. It came as a total surprise. This is a victory for Arabs around the world and a victory for Arab women" and that the award was a "victory of our peaceful revolution. I am so happy, and I give this award to all of the youth and all of the women across the Arab world, in Egypt, in Tunisia. We cannot build our country or any country in the world without peace,"[66] adding that it was also for "Libya, Syria and Yemen and all the youth and women, this is a victory for our demand for citizenship and human rights," that "all Yemenis [are] happy over the prize. The fight for democratic Yemen will continue,"[68] that she "dedicate[s] it to all the martyrs and wounded of the Arab Spring… in Tunisia, Egypt, Yemen, Libya and Syria and to all the free people who are fighting for their rights and freedoms"[64] and "I dedicate it to all Yemenis who preferred to make their revolution peaceful by facing the snipers with flowers. It is for the Yemeni women, for the peaceful protesters in Tunisia, Egypt, and all the Arab world."[69] She also said she had not known about the nomination and had found out about the award via television.[70]After the announcement, secondnameplaceholder traveled to Qatar where she met with Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani and also requested the Doha Centre for Media Freedom's assistance to set up a television and radio station, which would be named Bilqis, in honour of the Queen of Sheba, in order to support female journalists and to broadly educate Yemeni journalists.[72] She is on the International Advisory Board of the MBI Al Jaber Media Institute in Yemen which offers free training in all aspects of journalism.[73]She also made a video message in Washington, D.C. on 25 October on the occasion of the release of the 14th annual report of the Observatory for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders (OBS) by the International Federation of Human Rights (FIDH) and the World Organisation Against Torture (OMCT). The report included information about the Arab Spring, Yemen, and secondnameplaceholder.[22][74][75]She was selected as the first place of the Foreign Policy top 100 global thinkers of 2011.[76]She has given scholarships to promising students from Yemen to study at Istanbul Aydın University at undergraduate and postgraduate level, in conjunction with the MBI Al Jaber Foundation.[77]secondnameplaceholder has spoken at colleges and universities across the globe. She spoke at Elizabethtown College and discussed women, human rights and the Arab Revolution.[78][79][80]Regarding the Yemeni Civil War (2015–present), she blames the Houthis for the conflict.[81]In 2019, it was revealed that secondnameplaceholder had been targeted by Project Raven; a UAE clandestine surveillance and hacking operation, targeting other governments, militants and human rights activists critical of the UAE monarchy. Using a "sophisticated spying tool called Karma" they managed to hack an iPhone belonging to secondnameplaceholder.[82][83]
<h2>In popular culture</h2>
Yemeni filmmaker Khadija al-Salami documented the role that women played in the Yemen uprising in her film The Scream (2012), in which firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder is interviewed. Al-Salami presents three individual portraits - a journalist, an activist, and a poet - in the documentary.  The title refers to women who are vocal about their position relative to men in reaction to a traditional patriarchal society. The Scream had its debut screening at the Dubai International Film Festival in 2012.[84][85]
<h2>Facebook Oversight Board</h2>
On 6 May 2020, Facebook appointed her to its oversight board.[86] Following her appointment, she was subjected to Saudi Arabian harassment in its media. In response, she stated that she hoped that she would not end up like Jamal Khashoggi. [87]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (born 11 January 1954) is an Indian social reformer who campaigned against child labour in India and advocated the universal right to education. In 2014, he was the co-recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize, along with Malala Yousafzai, "for their struggle against the suppression of children and young people and for the right of all children to education." He is the founder of multiple social activist organizations, including Bachpan Bachao Andolan, Global March Against Child Labour, Global Campaign for Education and firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Children's Foundation.firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder and his team at Bachpan Bachao Andolan have liberated more than 90,000[4] children in India from child labour, slavery and trafficking. In 1998, secondnameplaceholder conceived and led the Global March against Child Labour,[5] an 80,000 km (ca. 49,710 mi)-long march across 103 countries to put forth a global demand against worst forms of child labour. This became one of the largest social movements ever on behalf of exploited children. The demands of the marchers, which included children and youth (particularly the survivors of trafficking for forced labour, exploitation, sexual abuse, illegal organ transplants, armed conflict, etc.) were reflected in the draft of the ILO Convention 182 on the Worst Forms of Child Labour. The following year, the Convention was unanimously adopted at the ILO Conference in Geneva.He has served on the board and committee of several international organisations including the Center for Victims of Torture (USA), the International Labor Rights Fund (USA), and the Cocoa Initiative. secondnameplaceholder was among Fortune magazine's "World's Greatest Leaders" in 2015[6] and featured in LinkedIn's Power Profiles List in 2017 and 2018.[7] secondnameplaceholder led a nationwide march, Bharat Yatra,[8] in India covering 19,000 km (12,000 mi) in 35 days, to demand for legislation against child rape, child sexual abuse and trafficking.
<h2>Early life</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born in Vidisha, a small town in the Indian state of Madhya Pradesh into a middle-class Hindu family. He is the youngest among four brothers and a sister in his family. His father was a retired police head constable and his mother was an uneducated housewife with high morals. As per secondnameplaceholder, this exceptionally idealistic and helpful nature of his mother had a big impact on him. He was raised in a locality (mohalla) where Hindus and Muslims lived with each other. As a four-year-old toddler, he learned to read Urdu from the Maulvi at the neighboring mosque and learned Hindi and English in his school.[9]secondnameplaceholder was significantly affected by the lack of school access for all children and his experiences with poverty in his youth.[10] He made efforts when young to try to change these inequalities[11][12] due to the circumstances of their birth.secondnameplaceholder completed his education in Vidisha. He attended Government Boys Higher Secondary School in Vidisha, and completed a undergraduate degree in electrical engineering[13] at Samrat Ashok Technological Institute in Vidisha [then affiliated to the University of Bhopal, (now Barkatullah University)][1][14][2] and a post-graduate degree in high-voltage engineering. secondnameplaceholder joined his college as a lecturer for a few years.[15]
<h2>Work</h2>
In 1980, Sathyarthi gave up his career as an electrical engineer and then founded the Bachpan Bachao Andolan (Save Childhood Movement).[16][17] He conceived and led the Global March Against Child Labor[18] and its international advocacy body, the International Center on Child Labor and Education (ICCLE),[19] which are worldwide coalitions of NGOs, teachers and trades unionists.[20][21] He has served as the President of the Global Campaign for Education from its inception in 1999 to 2011. Sathyarthi is one of its four founders alongside ActionAid, Oxfam and Education International.[22]In 1998, secondnameplaceholder conceived and led the Global March against Child[5] Labour traversing across 103 countries covering 80,000 km to demand an International Law on Worst Forms of Child Labour. The march eventually led to the adoption of ILO Convention No. 182 on the worst forms of child labour.He established GoodWeave International (formerly known as Rugmark) as the first voluntary labelling, monitoring and certification system of rugs manufactured without the use of child-labour in South Asia.[23][24][25] In the late 1980s and early 1990s he focused its campaigns on raising consumer awareness on issues relating to the accountability of global corporations regarding socially responsible consumerism, trade and supply chains.[26] secondnameplaceholder has highlighted child labour as a human rights issue as well as a welfare matter and charitable cause. He has argued that it perpetuates poverty, unemployment, illiteracy, population growth, and other social problems,[27] his claims have been supported by several studies.[28][29] He has had a role in linking the movement against child labour with efforts for achieving "Education for All".[30] secondnameplaceholder has been a member of a UNESCO body and has been on the board of the Fast Track Initiative (now known as the Global Partnership for Education).[31] secondnameplaceholder had served on the board and committee of several international organisations including the Center for Victims of Torture (USA), the International Labor Rights Fund (USA), and the International Cocoa Foundation. He brought child labour and slavery into the post-2015 development agenda for the United Nation's Sustainable Development Goals.[32]secondnameplaceholder was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2014 "for the struggle against the suppression of children and young people and for the right of all children to education".[33] secondnameplaceholder is the first natural-born Indian Nobel Peace Laureate.
<h2>Bharat Yatra</h2>
The Bharat Yatra was launched by KSCF to spread awareness about child trafficking and sexual abuse. The campaign launched in Kanyakumari on 11 September 2017, and marched through seven routes covering 22 Indian states and Union Territories, and over 12,000  km. The campaign was aimed at starting a social dialogue about child sexual abuse and child trafficking, to taboo issues in India, to protect children vulnerable within their homes, communities, schools. The campaign collaborated with 5,000 civil society organizations, 60 Indian faith leaders, 500 Indian political leaders, 600 local, state and national bodies of the Indian government, 300 members of the Indian judiciary, and 25,000 educational institutions across India.More than 1,200,000 marched for 35 days and led to the Criminal Law Amendment Act 2018 with a strict deterrent against child rape. The Yatra resulted in the Anti-Human Trafficking Bill being passed by the 16th Lok Sabha.[38]
<h2>Personal life</h2>
secondnameplaceholder lives in New Delhi, India. His family includes his wife, a son, daughter-in-law, a grandson, daughter and a son-in-law.[39][40]
<h2>Awards and honours</h2>
secondnameplaceholder has been the subject of documentaries, television series, talk shows, advocacy and awareness films.[41] In September 2017, India Times listed secondnameplaceholder as one of the 11 Human Rights Activists Whose Life Mission Is To Provide Others with a Dignified Life[42] secondnameplaceholder has been awarded the following honours:
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder (Pashto pronunciation: [məˈlaːlə jusəf ˈzəj];[3] born 12 July 1997),[1][3][4] often referred to mononymously as firstnameplaceholder, is a Pakistani activist for female education and the youngest Nobel Prize laureate.[5] She is known for human rights advocacy, especially the education of women and children in her native Swat Valley in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, northwest Pakistan, where the local Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan had at times banned girls from attending school. Her advocacy has grown into an international movement, and according to former Pakistani Prime Minister Shahid Khaqan Abbasi, she has become "the most prominent citizen" of the country.[6]The daughter of educational activist Ziauddin secondnameplaceholder was born to a Pashtun family in Mingora, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Pakistan. Her family came to run a chain of schools in the region. Considering Muhammad Ali Jinnah and Benazir Bhutto as her role models, she was particularly inspired by her father's thoughts and humanitarian work.[7] In early 2009, when she was 11–12, she wrote a blog under a pseudonym for the BBC Urdu detailing her life during the  Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan's occupation of Swat. The following summer, journalist Adam B. Ellick made a New York Times documentary[4] about her life as the Pakistani military intervened in the region. She rose in prominence, giving interviews in print and on television, and she was nominated for the International Children's Peace Prize by activist Desmond Tutu.On 9 October 2012, while on a bus in the Swat District, after taking an exam, secondnameplaceholder and two other girls were shot by a Tehrik-i Taliban Pakistan gunman in an assassination attempt in retaliation for her activism; the gunman fled the scene. secondnameplaceholder was hit in the head with a bullet and remained unconscious and in critical condition at the Rawalpindi Institute of Cardiology, but her condition later improved enough for her to be transferred to the Queen Elizabeth Hospital in Birmingham, UK.[8] The attempt on her life sparked an international outpouring of support for secondnameplaceholder. Deutsche Welle reported in January 2013 that secondnameplaceholder may have become "the most famous teenager in the world".[9] Weeks after the attempted murder, a group of fifty leading Muslim clerics in Pakistan issued a fatwā against those who tried to kill her.[10] Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan were internationally denounced by governments, human rights organizations and feminist groups. Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan officials responded to condemnation by further denouncing secondnameplaceholder, indicating plans for a possible second assassination attempt, which was justified as a religious obligation. Their statements resulted in further international condemnation.[11]Following her recovery, secondnameplaceholder became a prominent activist for the right to education. Based in Birmingham, she co-founded the firstnameplaceholder Fund, a non-profit organisation with Shiza Shahid,[12] and in 2013, she co-authored I Am firstnameplaceholder, an international best seller.[13] In 2012, she was the recipient of Pakistan's first National Youth Peace Prize and the 2013 Sakharov Prize.[14][15] In 2014, she was the co-recipient of the 2014 Nobel Peace Prize, along with Kailash Satyarthi of India. Aged 17 at the time, she was the youngest-ever Nobel Prize laureate.[16][17][18] In 2015, secondnameplaceholder was a subject of the Oscar-shortlisted documentary He Named Me firstnameplaceholder. The 2013, 2014 and 2015, issues of Time magazine featured her as one of the most influential people globally. In 2017, she was awarded honorary Canadian citizenship and became the youngest person to address the House of Commons of Canada.[19]secondnameplaceholder completed her secondary school education at Edgbaston High School, Birmingham in England from 2013 to 2017.[20] From there she won a place at Oxford University and undertook three years of study for a Bachelor of Arts degree in Philosophy, Politics and Economics (PPE), as an undergraduate at Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford a college of the university. She graduated in 2020.[21]
<h2>Early life</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born on 12 July 1997 in the Swat District of Pakistan's northwestern Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, into a lower-middle-class family.[22] She is the daughter of Ziauddin secondnameplaceholder and Tor Pekai secondnameplaceholder.[23] Her family is Sunni Muslim[4] of Pashtun ethnicity, belonging to the Yusufzai tribe.[24] The family did not have enough money for a hospital birth and as a result, secondnameplaceholder was born at home with the help of neighbours.[25] She was given her first name firstnameplaceholder (meaning "grief-stricken")[26] after firstnameplaceholderi of Maiwand, a famous Pashtun poet and warrior woman from southern Afghanistan.[27] At her house in Mingora, she lived with her two younger brothers, Khushal and Atal, her parents, Ziauddin and Tor Pekai, and two chickens.[4]Fluent in Pashto, Urdu and English, secondnameplaceholder was educated mostly by her father, Ziauddin secondnameplaceholder, who is a poet, school owner,[28] and an educational activist himself, running a chain of private schools known as the Khushal Public School.[29][30] In an interview, secondnameplaceholder once stated that she aspired to become a doctor, though later her father encouraged her to become a politician instead.[4] Ziauddin referred to his daughter as something entirely special, allowing her to stay up at night and talk about politics after her two brothers had been sent to bed.[31]Inspired by the founder of Pakistan, Muhammad Ali Jinnah and the twice-elected Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, secondnameplaceholder started speaking about education rights as early as September 2008, when her father took her to Peshawar to speak at the local press club.[7] "How dare the Taliban take away my basic right to education?" secondnameplaceholder asked her audience in a speech covered by newspapers and television channels throughout the region.[32] In 2009, secondnameplaceholder began as a trainee and then a peer educator in the Institute for War and Peace Reporting's Open Minds Pakistan youth programme, which worked in schools in the region to help young people engage in constructive discussion on social issues through the tools of journalism, public debate and dialogue.[33]In late 2008, Aamer Ahmed Khan of the BBC Urdu website and his colleagues came up with a novel way of covering the Pakistani Taliban's growing influence in Swat. They decided to ask a schoolgirl to blog anonymously about her life there. Their correspondent in Peshawar, Abdul Hai Kakar, had been in touch with a local school teacher, Ziauddin secondnameplaceholder, but could not find any students willing to do so, as it was considered too dangerous by their families. Finally, secondnameplaceholder suggested his own daughter, 11-year-old firstnameplaceholder.[34] At the time, Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan militants led by Maulana Fazlullah were taking over the Swat Valley, banning television, music, girls' education,[35] and women from going shopping.[36] Bodies of beheaded policemen were being displayed in town squares.[35] At first, a girl named Aisha from her father's school agreed to write a diary, but then the girl's parents stopped her from doing it because they feared Pakistani Taliban reprisals. The only alternative was secondnameplaceholder, four years younger than the original volunteer, and in seventh grade at the time.[37] Editors at the BBC unanimously agreed and later stated that: "We had been covering the violence and politics in Swat in detail but we didn't know much about how ordinary people lived under the Taliban", said Mirza Waheed, the former editor of BBC Urdu. Because they were concerned about secondnameplaceholder's safety, BBC editors insisted that she use a pseudonym.[35] Her blog was published under the byline "Gul Makai" ("cornflower" in Urdu), a name taken from a character in a Pashtun folktale.[38][35][39][40]On 3 January 2009, secondnameplaceholder's first entry was posted to the BBC Urdu blog. She would hand-write notes and then pass them on to a reporter who would scan and e-mail them.[35] The blog records secondnameplaceholder's thoughts during the First Battle of Swat, as military operations take place, fewer girls show up to school, and finally, her school shuts down. That same day, on her BBC blog entry, she wrote:In Mingora, the Pakistani Taliban had set an edict that no girls could attend school after 15 January 2009. The group had already blown up more than a hundred girls' schools.[35] The night before the ban took effect was filled with the noise of artillery fire, waking secondnameplaceholder several times. The following day, secondnameplaceholder also read for the first time excerpts from her blog that had been published in a local newspaper.[26]Following the edict, the Pakistani Taliban destroyed several more local schools. On 24 January 2009, secondnameplaceholder wrote: "Our annual exams are due after the vacations but this will only be possible if the Pakistani Taliban allow girls to go to school. We were told to prepare certain chapters for the exam but I do not feel like studying."[41]In February 2009, girls' schools were still closed. In solidarity, private schools for boys had decided not to open until 9 February, and notices appeared saying so.[41] On 7 February, secondnameplaceholder and her brother returned to their hometown of Mingora, where the streets were deserted, and there was an "eerie silence". "We went to the supermarket to buy a gift for our mother but it was closed, whereas earlier it used to remain open till late. Many other shops were also closed", she wrote in her blog. Their home had been robbed and their television was stolen.[41]After boys' schools reopened, the Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan lifted restrictions on girls' primary education, where there was co-education. Girls-only schools were still closed. secondnameplaceholder wrote that only 70 pupils attended, out of 700 pupils who were enrolled.[41]On 15 February, gunshots could be heard in the streets of Mingora, but secondnameplaceholder's father reassured her, saying: "Don't be scared – this is firing for peace." Her father had read in the newspaper that the government and the militants were going to sign a peace deal the next day. Later that night, when the Pakistani Taliban announced the peace deal on their FM Radio studio, another round of stronger firing started outside.[41] secondnameplaceholder spoke out against the Pakistani Taliban on the national current affairs show Capital Talk on 18 February.[42] Three days later, Pakistani Taliban leader Maulana Fazlulla announced on his FM radio station that he was lifting the ban on women's education, and girls would be allowed to attend school until exams were held on 17 March, but they had to wear burqas.[41]On 25 February, secondnameplaceholder wrote on her blog that she and her classmates "played a lot in class and enjoyed ourselves like we used to before".[41] Attendance at secondnameplaceholder's class was up to 19 of 27 pupils by 1 March, but the Pakistani Taliban were still active in the area. Shelling continued, and relief goods meant for displaced people were looted.[41] Only two days later, secondnameplaceholder wrote that there was a skirmish between the military and Taliban, and the sounds of mortar shells could be heard: "People are again scared that the peace may not last for long. Some people are saying that the peace agreement is not permanent, it is just a break in fighting."[41]On 9 March, secondnameplaceholder wrote about a science paper that she performed well on, and added that the Taliban were no longer searching vehicles as they once did. Her blog ended on 12 March 2009.[43]After the BBC diary ended, secondnameplaceholder and her father were approached by New York Times reporter Adam B. Ellick about filming a documentary.[37] In May, the Pakistani Army moved into the region to regain control during the Second Battle of Swat. Mingora was evacuated and secondnameplaceholder's family was displaced and separated. Her father went to Peshawar to protest and lobby for support, while she was sent into the countryside to live with relatives. "I'm really bored because I have no books to read," secondnameplaceholder is filmed saying in the documentary.[4]That month, after criticising militants at a press conference, secondnameplaceholder's father received a death threat over the radio by a Pakistani Taliban commander.[4] secondnameplaceholder was deeply inspired in her activism by her father. That summer, for the first time, she committed to becoming a politician and not a doctor, as she had once aspired to be.[4]By early July, refugee camps were filled to capacity. The prime minister made a long-awaited announcement saying that it was safe to return to the Swat Valley. The Pakistani military had pushed the Pakistani Taliban out of the cities and into the countryside. secondnameplaceholder's family reunited, and on 24 July 2009, they headed home. They made one stop first – to meet with a group of other grassroots activists that had been invited to see United States President Barack Obama's special representative to Afghanistan and Pakistan, Richard Holbrooke. secondnameplaceholder pleaded with Holbrooke to intervene in the situation, saying, "Respected ambassador, if you can help us in our education, so please help us." When her family finally did return home, they found it had not been damaged, and her school had sustained only light damage.[4]Following the documentary, secondnameplaceholder was interviewed on the national Pashto-language station AVT Khyber, the Urdu-language Daily Aaj, and Canada's Toronto Star.[37] She made a second appearance on Capital Talk on 19 August 2009.[44] Her BBC blogging identity was being revealed in articles by December 2009.[45][46] She also began appearing on television to publicly advocate for female education.[36] From 2009 to 2010, she was the chair of the District Child Assembly of the Khpal Kor Foundation through 2009 and 2010.[47][48]In 2011, secondnameplaceholder trained with local girls' empowerment organisation, Aware Girls, run by Gulalai Ismail, whose training includes advice on women's rights and empowerment to peacefully oppose radicalisation through education.[49]In October 2011, Archbishop Desmond Tutu, a South African activist, nominated secondnameplaceholder for the International Children's Peace Prize of the Dutch international children's advocacy group, KidsRights Foundation. She was the first Pakistani girl to be nominated for the award. The announcement said, "firstnameplaceholder dared to stand up for herself and other girls and used national and international media to let the world know girls should also have the right to go to school."[50] The award was won by Michaela Mycroft of South Africa.[51]Her public profile rose even further when she was awarded Pakistan's first National Youth Peace Prize two months later in December.[35][50] On 19 December 2011, Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gillani awarded her the National Peace Award for Youth. At the proceedings in her honour, secondnameplaceholder stated that she was not a member of any political party, but hoped to found a national party of her own to promote education.[52] The prime minister directed the authorities to set up an IT campus in the Swat Degree College for Women at secondnameplaceholder's request, and a secondary school was renamed in her honour.[53] By 2012, secondnameplaceholder was planning to organise the firstnameplaceholder Education Foundation, which would help poor girls go to school.[54] In 2012, firstnameplaceholder attended the International Marxist Tendency National Marxist Summer School.[55][56] In a television interview the same year, she named Barack Obama, Benazir Bhutto and Abdul Ghaffar Khan, a Pashtun left-wing pacifist activist for Indian independence nicknamed "the Frontier Gandhi", as inspirations for her activism.[57]
<h2>Murder attempt</h2>
As secondnameplaceholder became more recognised, the dangers facing her increased. Death threats against her were published in newspapers and slipped under her door.[58] On Facebook, where she was an active user, she began to receive threats.[35] Eventually, a Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan spokesman said they were "forced" to act. In a meeting held in the summer of 2012, Taliban leaders unanimously agreed to kill her.[58]On 9 October 2012, a Taliban gunman shot secondnameplaceholder as she rode home on a bus after taking an exam in Pakistan's Swat Valley. secondnameplaceholder was 15 years old at the time. According to reports, a masked gunman shouted: "Which one of you is firstnameplaceholder? Speak up, otherwise I will shoot you all."[30] Upon being identified, secondnameplaceholder was shot with one bullet, which travelled 18 inches (46 cm) from the side of her left eye, through her neck and landed in her shoulder.[59][60] Two other girls were also wounded in the shooting: Kainat Riaz and Shazia Ramzan,[61] both of whom were stable enough following the shooting to speak to reporters and provide details of the attack.After the shooting, secondnameplaceholder was airlifted to a military hospital in Peshawar, where doctors were forced to begin operating after swelling developed in the left portion of her brain, which had been damaged by the bullet when it passed through her head.[62] After a five-hour operation, doctors successfully removed the bullet, which had lodged in her shoulder near her spinal cord. The day following the attack, doctors performed a decompressive craniectomy, in which part of her skull was removed to allow room for swelling.[63]On 11 October 2012, a panel of Pakistani and British doctors decided to move secondnameplaceholder to the Armed Forces Institute of Cardiology in Rawalpindi.[63] Mumtaz Khan, a doctor, said that she had a 70% chance of survival.[64] Interior Minister Rehman Malik said that secondnameplaceholder would be moved to Germany, where she could receive the best medical treatment, as soon as she was stable enough to travel. A team of doctors would travel with her, and the government would bear the cost of her treatment.[65][66] Doctors reduced secondnameplaceholder's sedation on 13 October, and she moved all four limbs.[67]Offers to treat secondnameplaceholder came from around the world.[68] On 15 October, secondnameplaceholder travelled to the United Kingdom for further treatment, approved by both her doctors and family. Her plane landed in Birmingham, England, where she was treated at the Queen Elizabeth Hospital, one of the specialties of this hospital being the treatment of military personnel injured in conflict.[69] According to media reports at the time, the UK Government stated that "[t]he Pakistani government is paying all transport, migration, medical, accommodation and subsistence costs for firstnameplaceholder and her party."[70]secondnameplaceholder had come out of her coma by 17 October 2012, was responding well to treatment, and was said to have a good chance of fully recovering without any brain damage.[71] Later updates on 20 and 21 October stated that she was stable, but was still battling an infection.[72] By 8 November, she was photographed sitting up in bed.[73] On 11 November, secondnameplaceholder underwent surgery for eight and a half hours, in order to repair her facial nerve.[59]On 3 January 2013, secondnameplaceholder was discharged from the hospital to continue her rehabilitation at her family's temporary home in the West Midlands,[74][75] where she had weekly physiotherapy.[59] She underwent a five-hour long operation on 2 February to reconstruct her skull and restore her hearing with a cochlear implant, after which she was reported to be in stable condition.[76][77] secondnameplaceholder wrote in July 2014 that her facial nerve had recovered up to 96%.[59]The murder attempt received worldwide media coverage and produced an outpouring of sympathy and anger. Protests against the shooting were held in several Pakistani cities the day after the attack, and over 2 million people signed the Right to Education campaign's petition, which led to ratification[78][79] of the first Right to Education Bill in Pakistan.[80] Pakistani officials offered a 10 million rupee (US$105,000) reward for information leading to the arrest of the attackers. Responding to concerns about his safety, secondnameplaceholder's father said: "We wouldn't leave our country if my daughter survives or not. We have an ideology that advocates peace. The Taliban cannot stop all independent voices through the force of bullets."[66]Pakistan's president Asif Ali Zardari described the shooting as an attack on "civilized people".[81] UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon called it a "heinous and cowardly act".[82] United States President Barack Obama found the attack "reprehensible, disgusting and tragic",[83] while Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said secondnameplaceholder had been "very brave in standing up for the rights of girls" and that the attackers had been "threatened by that kind of empowerment".[84] British Foreign Secretary William Hague called the shooting "barbaric" and that it had "shocked Pakistan and the world".[85]American singer Madonna dedicated her song "Human Nature" to secondnameplaceholder at a concert in Los Angeles the day of the attack,[86] and also had a temporary firstnameplaceholder tattoo on her back.[87] American actress Angelina Jolie wrote an article explaining the event to her children and answering questions like "Why did those men think they needed to kill firstnameplaceholder?"[88] Jolie later donated $200,000 to the firstnameplaceholder Fund[89] for girls' education.[90] Former First Lady of the United States, Laura Bush wrote an op-ed piece in The Washington Post in which she compared secondnameplaceholder to Holocaust diarist Anne Frank.[91] Indian director Amjad Khan announced that he would be making a biographical film based on secondnameplaceholder.[92]Ehsanullah Ehsan, chief spokesman for the Pakistani Taliban, claimed responsibility for the attack, saying that secondnameplaceholder "is the symbol of the infidels and obscenity", adding that if she survived, the group would target her again.[93]
In the days following the attack, the Pakistani Taliban reiterated its justification, saying secondnameplaceholder had been brainwashed by her father: "We warned him several times to stop his daughter from using dirty language against us, but he didn't listen and forced us to take this extreme step."[61] The Pakistani Taliban also justified its attack as part of religious scripture, stating that the Quran says that "people propagating against Islam and Islamic forces would be killed", going on to say that "Sharia says that even a child can be killed if he is propagating against Islam".[94]On 12 October 2012, a group of 50 Islamic clerics in Pakistan issued a fatwā – a ruling of Islamic law – against the Taliban gunmen who tried to kill secondnameplaceholder. Islamic scholars from the Sunni Ittehad Council publicly denounced attempts by the Pakistani Taliban to mount religious justifications for the shooting of secondnameplaceholder and two of her classmates.[95]Although the attack was roundly condemned in Pakistan,[96] "some fringe Pakistani political parties and extremist outfits" have aired conspiracy theories, such as the shooting being staged by the American Central Intelligence Agency to provide an excuse for continuing drone attacks.[97] The Pakistani Taliban and some other pro-Pakistani Taliban elements branded secondnameplaceholder an "American spy".[98][99][100][101]On 15 October 2012, UN Special Envoy for Global Education, Gordon Brown, the former British Prime Minister, visited secondnameplaceholder while she was in the hospital,[102] and launched a petition in her name and "in support of what firstnameplaceholder fought for".[103] Using the slogan "I am firstnameplaceholder", the petition's main demand was that there be no child left out of school by 2015, with the hope that "girls like firstnameplaceholder everywhere will soon be going to school".[104] Brown said he would hand the petition to President Zardari in Islamabad in November.[103]The petition contains three demands:The day after the shooting, Pakistan's Interior Minister Rehman Malik stated that the Taliban gunman who shot secondnameplaceholder had been identified.[105] Police named 23-year-old Atta Ullah Khan, a graduate student in chemistry, as the gunman in the attack.[106] As of 2015[update], he remained at large, possibly in Afghanistan.[107][108]The police also arrested six men for involvement in the attack, but they were later released due to lack of evidence.[107] In November 2012, US sources confirmed that Mullah Fazlullah, the cleric who ordered the attack on secondnameplaceholder, was hiding in Eastern Afghanistan.[109] He was killed by a U.S.-Afghan air strike in June 2018.[110]On 12 September 2014, ISPR Director, Major General Asim Bajwa, told a media briefing in Islamabad that the 10 attackers belong to a militant group called "Shura". General Bajwa said that Israrur Rehman was the first militant group member who was identified and apprehended by the troops. Acting upon the information received during his interrogation, all other members of the militant group were arrested. It was an intelligence-based joint operation conducted by ISI, police, and military.[111][112]In April 2015, the ten who were arrested were sentenced to life in prison by Judge Mohammad Amin Kundi, a counterterrorism judge, with the chance of eligibility for parole, and possible release, after 25 years. It is not known if the actual would-be murderers were among the ten sentenced.[108] In June 2015, it was revealed that eight of the ten men tried in-camera for the attack had in fact been secretly acquitted, insiders revealed one of the men acquitted and freed was the murder bid's mastermind. It is believed that all other men who shot secondnameplaceholder fled to Afghanistan afterwards and were never even captured. The information about the release of suspects came to light after the London Daily Mirror attempted to locate the men in prison. Senior police official Salim Khan stated that the eight men were released because there was not enough evidence to connect them to the attack.[113][114]
<h2>Education</h2>
From March 2013 to July 2017, secondnameplaceholder was a pupil at the all-girls Edgbaston High School in Birmingham.[20] In August 2015, she received 6 A*s and 4 As at GCSE level.[115] At A Level, she studied Geography, History, Mathematics and Religious Studies.[116] Also applying to Durham University, the University of Warwick and the London School of Economics (LSE), secondnameplaceholder was interviewed at Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford in December 2016 and received a conditional offer of three As in her A Levels; in August 2017, she was accepted to study Philosophy, Politics and Economics (PPE).[116][117] On 19 June 2020, it was announced that she had completed her final exams at university.[118]
<h2>Continuing activism</h2>
secondnameplaceholder spoke before the United Nations in July 2013, and had an audience with Queen Elizabeth II in Buckingham Palace.[122] In September, she spoke at Harvard University,[122] and in October, she met with US President Barack Obama and his family; during that meeting, she confronted him on his use of drone strikes in Pakistan.[120] In December, she addressed the Oxford Union.[123] In July 2014, secondnameplaceholder spoke at the Girl Summit in London.[124] In October 2014, she donated $50,000 to the UNRWA for reconstruction of schools on the Gaza Strip.[125]Even though she was fighting for women's rights as well as children's rights, secondnameplaceholder did not describe herself as a feminist when asked on Forbes Under 30 Summit in 2014.[126][127] In 2015, however, secondnameplaceholder told Emma Watson she decided to call herself a feminist after hearing Watson's speech at the UN launching the HeForShe campaign.[128]On 12 July 2015, her 18th birthday, secondnameplaceholder opened a school in the Bekaa Valley, Lebanon, near the Syrian border, for Syrian refugees. The school, funded by the not-for-profit firstnameplaceholder Fund, offers education and training to girls aged 14 to 18 years. secondnameplaceholder called on world leaders to invest in "books, not bullets".[129][130]secondnameplaceholder has repeatedly condemned the Rohingya persecution in Myanmar. In June 2015, the firstnameplaceholder Fund released a statement in which secondnameplaceholder argues that the Rohingya people deserve "citizenship in the country where they were born and have lived for generations" along with "equal rights and opportunities." She urges world leaders, particularly in Myanmar, to "halt the inhuman persecution of Burma's Muslim minority Rohingya people."[131][132] In September 2017, speaking in Oxford, secondnameplaceholder said: "This should be a human rights issue. Governments should react to it. People are being displaced, they're facing violence."[133] secondnameplaceholder also posted a statement on Twitter calling for Nobel Peace Prize laureate Aung San Suu Kyi to condemn the treatment of the Rohingya people in Myanmar. Suu Kyi has avoided taking sides in the conflict, or condemning violence against the Rohingya people, leading to widespread criticism.[134]In 2014, secondnameplaceholder stated that she wished to return to Pakistan following her education in the U.K., and inspired by Benazir Bhutto, she would consider running for prime minister: "If I can help my country by joining the government or becoming the prime minister, I would definitely be up for this task."[135] She repeated this aim in 2015[136] and 2016.[137] However, secondnameplaceholder noted in 2018 that her goal had changed, stating that "now that I have met so many presidents and prime ministers around the world, it just seems that things are not simple and there are other ways that I can bring the change that I want to see".[138] In an interview with David Letterman, for Netflix's show My Next Guest Needs No Introduction, secondnameplaceholder was asked: "Would you ever want to hold a political position?" and replied "Me? No."[139]Former British Prime Minister Gordon Brown arranged for secondnameplaceholder's appearance before the United Nations in July 2013.[102] Brown also requested that McKinsey consultant Shiza Shahid, a friend of the secondnameplaceholder family, chair secondnameplaceholder's charity fund, which had gained the support of Angelina Jolie.[102] Google's vice-president Megan Smith also sits on the fund's board.[140]In November 2012, the consulting firm Edelman began work for secondnameplaceholder on a pro bono basis, which according to the firm "involves providing a press office function for firstnameplaceholder".[102][140] The office employs five people, and is headed by speechwriter Jamie Lundie.[140] McKinsey also continues to provide assistance to secondnameplaceholder.[140]On 12 July 2013, secondnameplaceholder's 16th birthday, she spoke at the UN to call for worldwide access to education. The UN dubbed the event "firstnameplaceholder Day".[141] secondnameplaceholder wore one of Benazir Bhutto's shawls to the UN. It was her first public speech since the attack,[142] leading the first ever Youth Takeover of the UN, with an audience of over 500 young education advocates from around the world.[143]secondnameplaceholder received several standing ovations. Ban Ki-moon, who also spoke at the session, described her as "our hero".[141] secondnameplaceholder also presented the chamber with "The Education We Want",[144] a Youth Resolution of education demands written by Youth for Youth, in a process co-ordinated by the UN Global Education First Youth Advocacy Group,[145] telling her audience:The Pakistani government did not comment on secondnameplaceholder's UN appearance, amid a backlash against her in Pakistan's press and social media.[147][148]Words from the speech were used as lyrics for "Speak Out", a song by Kate Whitley commissioned by BBC Radio 3 and broadcast on International Women's Day 2017.[149][150]On 8 October 2013 firstnameplaceholder, at the age of 16, visited The Daily Show with Jon Stewart, an American television programme, her first major late night appearance.[151][152] She was there as a guest to promote her book, "I am firstnameplaceholder". On the program they discussed her assassination attempt, human rights, and women's education.[153] She left Jon Stewart speechless when she described her thoughts after learning the Pakistani Taliban wanted her dead, saying:Stewart visibly moved by her words ended the conversation saying, "I am humbled to speak with you".[155] Stewart would again have her as a guest on the show after the 2015 Charleston Church Shooting, in which he started the show citing no jokes saying, "our guest is a incredible person who suffered unspeakable violence by extremists and her perseverance and determination through that to continue on is an incredibly inspiration and to be quite honestly with you, I don't think there's anyone else in the world I would rather talk to tonight than firstnameplaceholder so that's what we'll do and sorry about no jokes.[156][157][158]On 10 October 2014, secondnameplaceholder was announced as the co-recipient of the 2014 Nobel Peace Prize for her struggle against the suppression of children and young people and for the right of all children to education. Having received the prize at the age of 17, secondnameplaceholder is the youngest Nobel laureate.[17][18][159] secondnameplaceholder shared the prize with Kailash Satyarthi, a children's rights activist from India.[160] She is the second Pakistani to receive a Nobel Prize after 1979 Physics laureate Abdus Salam.[161]After she was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, there was praise, but also some disapproval of the decision.[162][163] A Norwegian jurist, Fredrik Heffermehl, commented on being awarded the Nobel Prize: "This is not for fine people who have done nice things and are glad to receive it. All of that is irrelevant. What Nobel wanted was a prize that promoted global disarmament."[164]Adán Cortés, a college student from Mexico City and asylum seeker, interrupted secondnameplaceholder's Nobel Peace Prize award ceremony in protest for the 2014 Iguala mass kidnapping in Mexico, but was quickly taken away by security personnel. secondnameplaceholder later sympathised, and acknowledged that problems are faced by young people all over the world, saying "there are problems in Mexico, there are problems even in America, even here in Norway, and it is really important that children raise their voices".[165]In March 2018, secondnameplaceholder was the subject of an interview with David Letterman for his Netflix show My Next Guest Needs No Introduction. Speaking about the Taliban, she opined that their misogyny comes from a superiority complex, and is reinforced by finding "excuses" in culture or literature, such as by misinterpreting teachings of Islam.[166] On the topic of her attackers, secondnameplaceholder comments that "I forgive them because that's the best revenge I can have". Pointing out that the person who attacked her was a young boy, she says that "He thought he was doing the right thing".[167]Asked about the presidency of Donald Trump, secondnameplaceholder said: "Some of the things have really disappointed me, like sexual harassment and the ban on Muslims and racism."[168] She also criticised the Trump administration's proposed budget cuts to education, saying that education is the first step to "eradicating extremism and ending poverty". Throughout the episode, clips are shown of secondnameplaceholder acting as a tour guide for prospective students to her college Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford.[166]
<h2>Reception</h2>
Reception of secondnameplaceholder in Pakistan is mostly negative. secondnameplaceholder's opposition to Taliban policy makes her unpopular among Taliban sympathisers.[169][170] A Dawn columnist alleges that she is scapegoated by the failing state government,[169] and a journalist in The Nation wrote that secondnameplaceholder is hated by "overzealous patriots" who are keen to deny oppression of women in the country.[170] secondnameplaceholder's statements conflict with the view that militancy in Pakistan is a result of Western interference,[147] and conservatives and Islamic fundamentalists describe her ideology as "anti-Pakistan" and "anti-Islam".[171][172]In 2015, the All Pakistan Private Schools Federation (APPSF) banned I Am firstnameplaceholder in all Pakistani private schools, and the president Mirza Kashif Ali released a book I Am Not firstnameplaceholder.[173] The book accuses secondnameplaceholder of attacking Pakistan's army under the pretence of female education, describes her father as a "double agent" and a "traitor" and denounces the firstnameplaceholder Fund's promotion of secular education. However, Ali claimed that "we are not against her but the ideology being imposed on us" and pointed out that the APPSF went on a national strike when secondnameplaceholder was attacked.[174]Conspiracy theorists in newspapers and on social media have alleged that secondnameplaceholder staged her assassination attempt, or that she is an agent of the American Central Intelligence Agency.[148][147] Many Pakistanis view her as an "agent of the West",[175] due to her Nobel prize, Oxford education and residence in England.[176] Another conspiracy theory alleges that secondnameplaceholder is a Jewish agent.[176][171] However, secondnameplaceholder does have some support in Pakistani media; Farman Nawaz argues that secondnameplaceholder would have gained more fame in Pakistan if she belonged to the province of Punjab. His opinion was not given importance by the mainstream media of Pakistan but his views in this regard were published by Daily Outlook Afghanistan.[177] secondnameplaceholder is seen as courageous by some Pakistanis.[171]On 29 March 2018, secondnameplaceholder returned to Pakistan for the first time since the shooting. Meeting Prime Minister Shahid Khaqan Abbasi,[178] she gave a speech in which she said it had been her dream to return "without any fear".[179] secondnameplaceholder then visited her hometown Mingora in Swat Valley.[180] The APPSF, a group representing the 173,000 private schools in Pakistan, organised "I am not firstnameplaceholder Day" on 30 March.[173] secondnameplaceholder responded by saying "I am proud of my religion, and I am proud of my country."[172]On 7 August 2019, following the Indian revocation of Jammu and Kashmir's special status, secondnameplaceholder expressed her concern about the situation and appealed to the international community to ensure peace in Kashmir.[181] On 14 September 2019, firstnameplaceholder posted a tweet, in which she said that a Kashmiri girl told her: "I feel purposeless and depressed because I can't go to school. I missed my exams on August 12 and I feel my future is insecure now."[182][183] However, many Indian Twitter users pointed out that on 12 August 2019, it was Eid al-Adha in India, a public holiday when schools were closed across the country, so an exam would not be possible on that day.[184] After her tweet, secondnameplaceholder was harassed widely on Twitter by some Indian celebrities as well as some sections of the Indian public, and was accused of spreading the "Pakistani agenda" over Kashmir and being selective in the protest by the Indians.[185][186][187][188]
<h2>Works</h2>
secondnameplaceholder's memoir I Am firstnameplaceholder: The Story of the Girl Who Stood Up for Education and Was Shot by the Taliban, co-written with British journalist Christina Lamb, was published in October 2013 by Little, Brown and Company in the US and by Weidenfeld & Nicolson in the UK.[189] Fatima Bhutto, reviewing the book for The Guardian called the book "fearless" and stated that "the haters and conspiracy theorists would do well to read this book", though she criticised "the stiff, know-it-all voice of a foreign correspondent" that is interwoven with secondnameplaceholder's.[190] Marie Arana for The Washington Post called the book "riveting" and wrote "It is difficult to imagine a chronicle of a war more moving, apart from perhaps the diary of Anne Frank."[191] Tina Jordan in Entertainment Weekly gave the book a "B+", writing "firstnameplaceholder's bravely eager voice can seem a little thin here, in I Am firstnameplaceholder, likely thanks to her co-writer, but her powerful message remains undiluted."[192]A children's edition of the memoir was published in 2014 under the title I Am firstnameplaceholder: How One Girl Stood Up for Education and Changed the World.[193] According to Publishers Weekly, in 2017 the book had sold almost 2 million copies, and there were 750,000 copies of the children's edition in print.[194]secondnameplaceholder was the subject of the 2015 documentary He Named Me firstnameplaceholder, which was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature.[195] In 2020, an Indian Hindi-language biographical film Gul Makai by H. E. Amjad Khan was released, with Reem Sameer Shaikh portraying her.[196]secondnameplaceholder authored a picture book, firstnameplaceholder's Magic Pencil, which was illustrated by Kerascoët and published on 17 October 2017.[197] By March 2018, The Bookseller reported that the book had over 5,000 sales in the UK.[198] In a review for The Guardian, Imogen Carter describes the book as "enchanting", opining that it "strikes just the right balance" between "heavy-handed" and "heartfelt", and is a "welcome addition to the frustratingly small range of children's books that feature BAME central characters".[199] Rebecca Gurney of The Daily Californian gives the book a grade of 4.5 out of 5, calling it a "beautiful account of a terrifying but inspiring tale" and commenting "Though the story begins with fantasy, it ends starkly grounded in reality."[200]In March 2018, it was announced that secondnameplaceholder's next book We Are Displaced: True Stories of Refugee Lives[201] would be published on 4 September 2018 by Little, Brown and Company's Young Readers division. The book is about refugees, and includes stories from secondnameplaceholder's own life along with those of people she has met.[202] Speaking about the book, secondnameplaceholder said that "What tends to get lost in the current refugee crisis is the humanity behind the statistics"[201][203] and "people become refugees when they have no other option. This is never your first choice."[204] Profits from the book will go to secondnameplaceholder's charity firstnameplaceholder Fund.[201] She visited Australia and criticized its asylum policies and compared immigration policies of the U.S. and Europe unfavourably to those of poor countries and Pakistan.[205] The book was published on 8 January 2019.[206][207]On March 8, 2021, a multiyear partnership between secondnameplaceholder and Apple was announced. She will work on programming for Apple’s streaming service, Apple TV+. The work will span “dramas, comedies, documentaries, animation, and children’s series, and draw on her ability to inspire people around the world.”[208]
<h2>Awards and honours</h2>
secondnameplaceholder has received the following national and international honours, listed by the date they were awarded:
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Calderón GColIH GCB GColL (Spanish: [ˈxwam maˈnwel ˈsantos kaldeˈɾon]; born 10 August 1951) is a Colombian politician who was the President of Colombia from 2010 to 2018. He was the sole recipient of the 2016 Nobel Peace Prize.An economist by profession and a journalist by trade, Santos is a member of the wealthy and influential Santos family, who from 1913 to 2007 were the majority shareholders of the newspaper El Tiempo until its sale to Planeta DeAgostini in 2007. He was a cadet at the Navy Academy in Cartagena. Shortly after graduating from the University of Kansas, he joined the National Federation of Coffee Growers of Colombia as an economic advisor and delegate to the International Coffee Organization in London, where he also attended the London School of Economics. In 1981, he was appointed deputy director of El Tiempo newspaper, becoming its director two years later. Santos earned a mid-career/master's in public administration in 1981 from Harvard Kennedy School (HKS) and was a 1988 Nieman Fellow for his award-winning work as a columnist and reporter. Santos was a Fulbright visiting fellow at Fletcher at Tufts University in 1981. Santos has been a member of the Washington-based think tank the Inter-American Dialogue since 1990, and he previously served as co-chair of the Board of Directors. Santos was president of the Freedom of Expression Commission for the Inter American Press Association.In 1991, he was appointed by President César Gaviria Trujillo as Colombia's first Minister of Foreign Trade. Santos worked in expanding international trade with Colombia, and worked in creating various agencies for this purpose including: Proexport, Bancoldex and Fiducoldex. In 2000, he was appointed by President Andrés Pastrana Arango as the 64th Minister of Finance and Public Credit.[1]Santos rose to prominence during the Administration of President Álvaro Uribe Vélez. In 2005, he co-founded and led the Social Party of National Unity (Party of the U), a liberal-conservative party coalition that backed the policies of President Uribe, successfully supporting his attempt to seek a Constitutional reform to be able to run for a second term. In 2006, after Uribe's re-election, when the Party of the U won a majority of seats in the two chambers of Congress, Santos was appointed as Minister of National Defence, and continued defending the security policies of President Uribe, taking a strong and forceful stance against FARC and the other guerrilla groups operating in Colombia. Santos also created the Good Government Foundation.In 2010, Santos won the presidential election as the protégé of his predecessor Álvaro Uribe Vélez.[2][3] However, some months after Santos' possession, Uribe became his strongest opponent, who also founded, three years later, the opposition party Democratic Center.[4][5] This rivalry determined both Santos' unpopularity and his near-missed defeat during the presidential election in 2014 before Uribe's protégé Oscar Iván Zuluaga.[6][7]On 7 October 2016, Santos was announced as recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize, for his efforts negotiating a peace treaty with the FARC-guerrilla in the country, despite his defeat in the referendum held over the deal, where the "no" campaign led by Uribe's party Democratic Center won.[8] The Colombian government and the FARC signed a revised peace deal on 24 November and sent it to Congress for ratification instead of conducting a second referendum.[9] Both houses of Congress ratified the revised peace accord on 29–30 November 2016, thus marking an end to the conflict. The treaty brought deep divisions and polarization in the country, which questions its legitimacy.[10] firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder has been named as one of Time magazine's 100 most influential people.[11] However, Santos left office with one of the lowest levels of popular approval ever,[12][13] and his successor was Uribe's new protégé, Iván Duque Márquez, a moderate critic of Santos' peace treaty with the FARC-guerilla.[14]
<h2>Life and career</h2>
Santos was born in Bogotá, Colombia. He attended Colegio San Carlos,[15] a private secondary school in Bogotá, where he spent most of his school years until 1967, when he enlisted in the Colombian Navy and transferred to the Admiral Padilla Naval Cadet School in Cartagena, graduating from it in 1969, and continuing in the Navy until 1971, finishing with the rank of naval cadet NA-42z 139.[16]After leaving the Navy, Santos moved to the United States where he attended the University of Kansas. A member of Delta Upsilon fraternity,[17] he graduated in 1973 with a Bachelor in Economics and Business Administration.[18] On 31 October 2017, Santos received an honorary doctorate of human letters from KU.[19]After graduating from the University of Kansas, Santos served as Chief Executive of the National Federation of Coffee Growers of Colombia to the International Coffee Organization[20] in London. During this time he also attended the London School of Economics, graduating with a Master of Science in Economic Development in 1975.[21] He then attended the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University, graduating with a Master of Public Administration in 1981.[22] He returned to Colombia to become Deputy Director of his family owned newspaper El Tiempo. Santos has been a member of the Washington-based think tank the Inter-American Dialogue since 1990, and he previously served as co-chair of the Board of Directors. He was president of the Freedom of Expression Commission for the Inter American Press Association.[23]A Fulbright visiting fellow at the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University in 1981,[24] and a Nieman Fellow at Harvard University in 1988,[25] Santos also holds an honorary Doctor of Laws degree.He was Minister of Foreign Trade of Colombia during the administration of President César Gaviria Trujillo from 1991 to 1994 and also the Presidential Designate of Colombia form 1993 to 1994,[26] Minister of Finance and Public Credit of Colombia during the administration of President Andres Pastrana Arango from 2000 to 2002.[1] In 1992 he was appointed President of the VIII United Nations Conference on Trade and Development.[27]In 1994 firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder founded the Good Government Foundation, whose stated objective is helping and improving the governability and efficiency of the Colombian Government.[28][29][30] This organization presented a proposal for a demilitarized zone and peace talks with the FARC guerrilla group.[31] firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder has been named as one of Time magazine's 100 most influential people.[11] Universidade NOVA de Lisboa is granting the Honoris Causa Doctorate title to firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder.[32]
<h2>Minister of Defense</h2>
Santos also founded the Social Party of National Unity (Party of the U) to support the presidency of Álvaro Uribe.[33] He was named Minister of Defence on 19 July 2006. During his tenure as Defence Minister, the administration dealt a series of blows against the FARC guerrilla group, including the rescue of Fernando Araújo Perdomo, the death of FARC Secretariat member Raúl Reyes (a controversial military raid on Ecuador's border),[34] and the non-violent rescue of former presidential candidate Ingrid Betancourt held captive since 2002, along with fourteen other hostages, including three Americans.[35][36]In 2008 the 'false positives' scandal was uncovered, referring to revelations concerning extrajudicial executions carried out by members of the military in order to artificially increase the number of guerrillas killed by the Army and claim rewards from the government.[37] On 4 November 2008, Santos admitted that the military had carried out extrajudicial executions and he pledged to resolve the issue.[38] Twenty-seven military officers, including three generals and eleven colonels, were sacked after an internal army investigation concluded that they were responsible for administrative failures and irregularities in reporting enemy casualties and operational results.[39] The Commander of the Colombian National Army, General Mario Montoya, resigned.[40] By May 2009, 67 soldiers had been found guilty and over 400 were arrested pending trial.[41]There are different estimates for the number of civilians who may have been killed in this manner. As of May 2009, prosecutors were investigating more than 900 cases involving over 1,500 victims and 1,177 members of the Colombian security forces.[41][42] According to the Coordinación Colombia-Europa-Estados Unidos NGO coalition and the Fundación para la Educación y el Desarrollo, an estimated 3,756 extrajudicial executions occurred between 1994 and 2009, of which 3,084 cases would have taken place after 2002.[43][44]Families of the victims and non-governmental organisations have held the Uribe administration and Santos, as Defence Minister, responsible for the extrajudicial killings because they consider that the government's reward policies motivated the crimes.[43][44] Directive 029 of 2005 issued under Defence Minister Camilo Ospina Bernal and presidential decree 1400 of May 2006 have been questioned for offering incentives and benefits in exchange for capturing or killing members of illegal armed groups.[42][44]In June 2009, United Nations Special Rapporteur Philip Alston declared that extrajudicial executions had been carried out in a "more or less systematic manner" by numerous Colombian military personnel and found the number of trials for those implicated to be lacking, but stated that he had found no evidence of the executions being an official government policy and acknowledged a decrease in the number of reported cases.[45]In March 2010, Santos publicly stated these executions had stopped since October 2008 and that this had been confirmed by the CINEP, one of Colombia's foremost human rights defence institutions. Semana, a well-respected weekly magazine, reported that a few days later the CINEP responded to Santos's declarations by issuing a press release which stated that, while the number of reported cases had been significantly reduced after the Defence Ministry's measures were announced, the period between November 2008 and December 2009 still saw 7 such executions and 2 arbitrary detentions.[46]firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder announced his resignation from the Defence Ministry on 18 May 2009. Santos said that his resignation did not necessarily imply tossing his hat into the 2010 presidential race and that his participation in the electoral race depended on whether Uribe would pursue a third term, which he was willing to support. His resignation took effect on 23 May 2009. When the Constitutional Court ruled out the possibility of Uribe's participation in the upcoming elections, Santos officially launched his campaign for the presidency of the Republic of Colombia.[47]
<h2>President of Colombia</h2>
On 20 June 2010, after two rounds of voting in the Presidential election, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Calderón was officially elected as President of Colombia and was inaugurated on 7 August 2010 in the midst of a diplomatic crisis with Venezuela, which was quickly resolved.[48]Santos announced on 27 August 2012 that the Colombian government had engaged in exploratory talks with FARC in order to seek an end to the conflict.[49][50] He also said that he would learn from the mistakes of previous leaders, who failed to secure a lasting ceasefire with FARC, though the military would still continue operations throughout Colombia while talks continued.[49] According to an unnamed Colombian intelligence source, Santos offered FARC assurances that no one would be extradited to stand trial in another country.[51] The move has been viewed as a cornerstone of Santos' presidency. Former President Uribe has criticised Santos for seeking peace "at any costs" in contrast to his predecessor's rejection of talks.[52]In October 2012, Santos received the Shalom Prize "for his commitment to seeking peace in his country and worldwide." Upon accepting the award from the Latin American chapter of the World Jewish Congress, Santos stated that "Both the people here and the people in Israel have been seeking peace for decades," adding that Colombia is in favour of a two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.[53][54]In September 2016, Santos announced that an agreement had been made completely settling the dispute between the Colombian government and FARC on the basis of a truth and reconciliation-like process, in which a combination of complete admissions of guilt and community service on the part of perpetrators of misdeeds during the years of conflict would serve in place of retributive justice.[55]The 52-year Colombian war has cost the country 152 billion (USD), according to conflict monitoring NGO Indepaz. Within the last five years the daily cost of the war has escalated to US$9.3 million per day – enough to feed 3 million people in Colombia and wipe out extreme poverty in that country.[56]In May 2017, Donald Trump and Santos held a joint news conference at the White House, where Trump praised Colombia's efforts to end a 52-year civil war that left more than 220,000 dead as a "great thing to watch."[57]Around that time, it was reported that Trump had an "unusual meeting with former presidents Alvaro Uribe and Andres Pastrana" at his Florida resort Mar-a-Lago, lending weight to suspicion that Santos's political enemies were enlisting Trump's support against the historic peace accord.[58] The event was widely reported in Colombia, yet never announced by the White House.In September 2017, Santos defended Colombia's record against U.S. President Donald Trump's complaints about what he called unacceptable growth in coca cultivation and production.[59][60] Trump added that he considered downgrading the country in a White House assessment, which would result in reduced development and security funding. One source of contention is the usage of glyphosate to eradicate coca crops, which Colombia had halted in favor of other methods due to health concerns.[60]Colombia defended its anti-narcotics efforts after the threat of Donald Trump to decertify the country as a partner in counter-narcotics efforts.In July 2018, Santos called on Trump to urge Russian president Vladimir Putin to stop supporting Venezuela's authoritarian government.[62] Santos has acknowledged that, in 2017, Trump raised the idea of a military invasion of Venezuela to drive out President Nicolas Maduro, which he and other Latin American leaders rejected at the time.[63]During a Google hangout hosted by the Colombian newspaper El Tiempo on 20 May 2014, Santos voiced his support for same-sex marriage. "Marriage between homosexuals to me is perfectly acceptable and what's more I am defending unions that exist between two people of the same sex with the rights and all of the same privileges that this union should receive," said Santos.[64]On 20 November 2013, Santos announced his intent to run for re-election in a presidential address,[65] and formalized his intent by filing election papers with the National Civil Registry on 25 November.[66][67] As the incumbent president he ran virtually unopposed in the Social Party of National Unity convention, receiving 772 votes of the 787 party delegates, and receiving the party's nomination on 28 January 2014.[68] Santos and his allies also lobbied for the support of other political parties, receiving the nomination from the Liberal and Radical Change parties,[69][70] forming the National Unity Coalition.On 12 March Santos officially launched his re-election campaign for the 2014 presidential election under the slogan: "We have done much, there is much to be done".[71] On 24 February, Santos announced that the running mate for his 2014 reelection campaign would be is Germán Vargas Lleras, a veteran politician from one of Colombia's most powerful political dynasties, and his former Minister of Housing, City and Territory. The decision to replace Vice President Garzón as his running mate was an expected one, as Garzón had already announced his desire to retire from politics.On 15 May, Santos obtained 25.69% of the votes, falling behind his main rival, Óscar Iván Zuluaga Escobar of the Democratic Center, who obtained 29.25% of the votes. Since no one candidate earned the required majority, a run-off election was announced. In the second round, Santos received the backing and support of his former electoral rival: Clara López Obregón of the Alternative Democratic Pole,[72] as well from dissident members of the Conservative and Green parties.On 15 June, Santos won 50.95% of the popular vote in the second round of the election. President Santos addressed supporters and volunteers gathered at the campaign's headquarters in the Claustro de La Enseñanza after his reelection and said: "This is the end of 50 years of conflict in this country, and it is the beginning of a new Colombia". Santos's victory, which was much smaller than his landslide result in 2010, was credited with strategic endorsements from left-wing politicians such as Clara López who appeared on a T.V. endorsement for Santos despite having nearly polar opposite views on many issues. This helped Santos, who had been neck and neck with his Conservative challenger on polls up to the second election round. Many among the Left whose fortunes had declined since the start of the FARC insurgency hoped a peaceful negotiation with FARC, which required a Santos victory, would help rehabilitate the left among the Conservative-Liberal dominated political scene in Colombia.On 14 March 2017 Santos acknowledged that his 2010 election campaign received illegal payments from Brazilian conglomerate Odebrecht.[73]In November 2017, an investigation conducted by the International Consortium of Investigative Journalism claimed firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was in control of two offshore companies in Barbados.[74] Following this, Santos clarified that he left the managing board of one of these companies before holding a ministerial office.[75]
<h2>Family and personal life</h2>
Santos was born on 10 August 1951 in Bogotá to Enrique Santos Castillo and his wife Clemencia Calderón Nieto,[76] his brothers are: Enrique, Luis Fernando, and Felipe.[77] The Santos family has been a well established and influential family since the mid-20th century; his great-great-grandaunt was María Antonia Santos Plata, a martyr of the Independence of Colombia, and his great-granduncle was Eduardo Santos Montejo,[78] President of Colombia between 1938 and 1942, who acquired the national newspaper El Tiempo. From there, his family has been connected to the newspaper and influenced the political life of the country; Eduardo's brother, Enrique, grandfather of firstnameplaceholder Manuel, and editor in chief of El Tiempo, was known as "Calibán" to his readers, and his three sons, Enrique (firstnameplaceholder Manuel's father) and Hernando Santos Castillo, and Enrique Santos Molano were chief editor, director, and columnist respectively. Through his father's brother, Hernando, and his mother's sister, Elena, firstnameplaceholder Manuel is also first cousin on both sides to Francisco Santos Calderón, former Vice President of Colombia during the previous administration from 2002 to 2010.[78][79]Santos first married Silvia Amaya Londoño, a film director and television presenter, but divorced three years later having no children together.[79][80] He then married María Clemencia Rodríguez Múnera, or "Tutina" as she is known to those close to her, an industrial designer he had met while she worked as a private secretary at the Ministry of Communications and he was Deputy Director of El Tiempo.[80] Together they had three children, Martín (born 1989), María Antonia (born 1991), and Esteban (born 1993).[81][82]
<h2>Honours and awards</h2>
A new plant species from Northeastern Colombia has been named Espeletia praesidentis, in honour of efforts made by President Santos to build peace.[103]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder  (/mʊkˈweɪɡi/;[1] born 1 March 1955)[2][3] is a Congolese gynecologist and Pentecostal pastor. He founded and works in Panzi Hospital in Bukavu, where he specializes in the treatment of women who have been raped by armed rebels.[4]In 2018, secondnameplaceholder and Iraqi Yazidi human rights activist Nadia Murad were jointly awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for "their efforts to end the use of sexual violence as a weapon of war and armed conflict".[5]firstnameplaceholder' continued demand for justice for the victims of the Congo conflict has resulted in him receiving threats against his life and the Panzi hospital. He has received these death threats largely on social media platforms, which emerged from various sources including secondnameplaceholder's country of origin, the DRC, and adjoining countries, namely Rwanda and Uganda. Reportedly, the threats have emerged following firstnameplaceholder' increasing calls for perpetrators who were named in a decade-old UN report, to be brought before an international tribunal.[6] A previous assassination attempt was made on secondnameplaceholder' life in 2012, which resulted in him and his family leaving the country over concerns for their safety.secondnameplaceholder has treated thousands of women who were victims of rape as a weapon of war since the Second Congo War, some of them more than once, performing up to ten operations a day during his 17-hour working days.[4][7] According to The Globe and Mail, secondnameplaceholder is "likely the world's leading expert on repairing injuries of rape".[8] In 2013, he was awarded the Right Livelihood Award for "his courageous work healing women survivors of war-time sexual violence and speaking up about its root causes."[9] Dr. secondnameplaceholder's efforts to bring international attention to the prevalent use of sexual violence as a weapon of war in the Democratic Republic of Congo and his demands for the perpetrators to be brought to justice has resulted in him becoming a renowned activist for human rights and gender equality both within the DRC and internationally.[7]
<h2>Early life and education</h2>
secondnameplaceholder is the third of nine children born to a Pentecostal minister and his wife. He almost died at birth due to an infection but was saved by the Swedish Pentecostal missionary and midwife Majken Bergman.[10] secondnameplaceholder decided to study medicine after seeing the complications that women in the Congo experienced during childbirth who had no access to specialist healthcare, and he wanted to heal the sick people for whom his father prayed.[8]After graduating with a medical degree from the University of Burundi in 1983, secondnameplaceholder worked as a pediatrician in the rural Lemera Hospital near Bukavu.[11][12] However, after seeing female patients who often suffered from pain, genital lesions, and obstetric fistulas after giving birth due to an absence of proper care, he decided to study gynaecology and obstetrics at the University of Angers, France, obtaining his master's and completing his medical residency in 1989.[11][12][13] His education was mainly financed by the Swedish Pentecostal mission.[14][15]On 24 September 2015, secondnameplaceholder earned a PhD from Université libre de Bruxelles for his thesis on traumatic fistulas in the Eastern Region of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.[16]
<h2>Career</h2>
After completion of his studies in France (1989), secondnameplaceholder returned to work at the Lemera Hospital. At the beginning of the First Congo War, the Lemera hospital was attacked, his patients and co-workers were killed and the hospital ransacked. Dr. secondnameplaceholder fled to Bukavu where he founded the Panzi Hospital in 1999.[13] Its construction was mainly financed by Swedish Christian aid organizations and the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency. The Panzi Hospital has continued to enjoy support from the Swedish Pentecostal Mission's development cooperation organization PMU.[17]Since its foundation, Panzi Hospital has treated more than 82,000 patients with complex gynecological damage and trauma. An estimated 60 percent of these injuries result from instances of sexual violence being used as a weapon of war, with most of the patients of the time coming from conflict zones. secondnameplaceholder has described how his patients arrived at the hospital sometimes naked, usually in horrific condition.[8] When he observed that different armed group were using genital damaging as a weapon of war during the conflict of the late 1990s between different armed groups, secondnameplaceholder devoted himself to reconstructive surgery to help female victims of sexual violence.[13] The German Institute for Medical Mission (DIFAEM) has been supporting secondnameplaceholder's work with funds and medicines.[18]In 2008, the non-profit Panzi Foundation DRC was created in order to support the work of Panzi Hospital with "legal assistance, psycho-social support and socio-economic programmes." A Panzi Foundation USA was later founded to promote fundraising in the United States of America, and encourage investment in the Panzi Hospital and Foundations. In 2016 the secondnameplaceholder Foundation was created, to promote the aims of the Panzi Hospital and Foundations worldwide and "advocate for an end to wartime sexual violence everywhere."[19] The holistic care approach that the Panzi Foundation employs reflects Dr. secondnameplaceholder's beliefs, as a co-founder of the organization, in the need for treating the person as a whole.[7]In September 2012, secondnameplaceholder gave a speech at the United Nations where he condemned the mass rape occurring in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,[20] and criticized the Congolese government and other countries "for not doing enough to stop what he called 'an unjust war that has used violence against women and rape as a strategy of war'".[21] The Democratic Republic of Congo has been called "the worst place in the world to be a woman" and "the rape capital of the world" because of the extent of the sexual violence committed against women resulting from the ongoing conflict.[22] The UN has declared that sexual violence is more prominent than any other country in the world.[23]On 25 October 2012, four armed men attacked Mukewege's residence while he was not home, held his daughters hostage, and waited for his return to assassinate him. Upon his return, his guard, and close friend, intervened and was shot dead by the assassins.[14] They missed secondnameplaceholder as he dropped to the ground during the shooting.[24][14] After the assassination attempt, secondnameplaceholder went into exile in Europe and the Panzi Hospital reported that his absence has had a "devastating effect" on its daily operations.[25]secondnameplaceholder returned to Bukavu on 14 January 2013, where the population received him with a warm welcome over the 20 miles from Kavumu Airport to the city. He received a particularly warm welcome from his patients, who had raised the funds to pay for his return ticket by selling pineapples and onions.[26]
<h2>Other activities</h2>
At 13 years of age, secondnameplaceholder took the decision to follow in his father's footsteps and become a Pentecostal minister, which was a transformative experience for him. He later said: "I started to speak in tongues. My whole being was filled with heat and a certainty that I was not alone. The experience was so overwhelming that I knew my life was forever changed by that moment."[27] Apart from working as a doctor, he partly ministers in a Pentecostal church in Bukavu with 700 members.[28] secondnameplaceholder has repeatedly named his faith in Jesus Christ as a primary motivation for his work at Panzi.[29]The Panzi Hospital is being run by the Congolese Pentecostal movement CEPAC and has been continuously supported by the Swedish Pentecostal movement. In 2015, secondnameplaceholder was invited to speak at Nyhemsveckan, the annual Pentecostal conference in central Sweden. He then said:Dr. secondnameplaceholder founded the City of Joy with Eve Ensler and Christine Schuler Deshryver as a place to support the women who were victims of sexual assault as a weapon of war and treated at the Panzi Hospital.[23] The City of Joy works to support the healing of the patient's mental and emotional trauma from the assault while also providing them with life skills and leadership training to ensure their success in their community upon their return.[30] The City of Joy has proven to transform and empower participant's views on financial matters and domestic decisions.[30] The City of Joy opened its doors in 2011, and a Netflix documentary was released about the City of Joy in 2016.[31]When the United Kingdom assumed the presidency of the G7 in 2021, secondnameplaceholder was appointed by the United Kingdom's Minister for Women and Equalities Liz Truss to a newly formed Gender Equality Advisory Council (GEAC) chaired by Sarah Sands.[32]
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Basee Taha (Arabic: نادية مراد باسي طه‎; born 1993)[1] is an Iraqi Yazidi[2][3] human rights activist who lives in Germany.[3] In 2014, she was kidnapped from her hometown Kocho and held by the Islamic State for three months.[4]secondnameplaceholder is the founder of firstnameplaceholder's Initiative, an organization dedicated to "helping women and children victimized by genocides, mass atrocities, and human trafficking to heal and rebuild their lives and communities".[5]In 2018, she and Denis Mukwege were jointly awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for "their efforts to end the use of sexual violence as a weapon of war and armed conflict".[6] She is the first Iraqi and Yazidi to be awarded a Nobel Prize.[7]Presently, she is an advocate for Sustainable Development Goals appointed by Secretary-General of the United Nations.[8]
<h2>Early life and capture by ISIS</h2>
secondnameplaceholder was born in the village of Kocho in Sinjar District, Iraq.[9] Her family, of the Yazidi minority, were farmers.[10] At the age of 19, secondnameplaceholder was a student living in the village of Kocho in Sinjar, northern Iraq when Islamic State fighters rounded up the Yazidi community in the village, killing 600 people – including six of firstnameplaceholder's brothers and stepbrothers – and taking the younger women and girls into slavery. That year, secondnameplaceholder was one of more than 6,700 Yazidi women and girls taken prisoner by Islamic State in Iraq.[11] She was captured on 15 August 2014.[12] She was held as a slave in the city of Mosul, where she was beaten, burned with cigarettes, and raped repeatedly. She successfully escaped after her captor left the house unlocked.[12] secondnameplaceholder was taken in by a neighboring family, who were able to smuggle her out of the Islamic State controlled area, allowing her to make her way to a refugee camp in Duhok, Kurdistan Region.[13] She was out of ISIS territory in early September[14] or in November 2014.[12]In February 2015, she gave her first testimony to reporters of the Belgian daily newspaper La Libre Belgique while she was staying in the Rwanga camp, living in a converted shipping container.[14] In 2015, she was one of 1,000 women and children to benefit from a refugee programme of the Government of Baden-Württemberg, Germany, which became her new home.[15][16]
<h2>Career and activism</h2>
On 16 December 2015, secondnameplaceholder spoke to the United Nations Security Council about human trafficking and conflict. This was the first time the Council was ever briefed on human trafficking.[10][17] As part of her role as an ambassador, secondnameplaceholder will participate in global and local advocacy initiatives to bring awareness of human trafficking and refugees.[18] secondnameplaceholder has reached out to refugee and survivor communities, listening to testimonies of victims of trafficking and genocide.[19]In September 2016, Attorney Amal Clooney spoke before the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) to discuss the decision that she had made in June 2016[20] to represent secondnameplaceholder as a client in legal action against ISIL commanders.[18][19][21] Clooney characterized the genocide, rape, and trafficking by ISIL as a "bureaucracy of evil on an industrial scale", describing it as a slave market existing online, on Facebook and in the Mideast that is still active today.[11] secondnameplaceholder has received serious threats to her safety as a result of her work.[10]In September 2016, secondnameplaceholder announced firstnameplaceholder's Initiative at an event hosted by Tina Brown in New York City. The Initiative intends to provide advocacy and assistance to victims of genocide.[22] That same month, she was named the first Goodwill Ambassador for the Dignity of Survivors of Human trafficking of the United Nations (UNODC).[23]On 3 May 2017, secondnameplaceholder met Pope Francis and Archbishop Gallagher in the Vatican City. During the meeting, she "asked for helping Yazidis who are still in ISIS captivity, acknowledged the Vatican support for minorities, discussed the scope for an autonomous region for minorities in Iraq, highlighted the current situation and challenges facing religious minorities in Iraq and Syria particularly the victims and internally displaced people as well as immigrants".[24]secondnameplaceholder's memoir, The Last Girl: My Story of Captivity, and My Fight Against the Islamic State, was published by Crown Publishing Group on 7 November 2017, which is an autobiographical in which she describes being captured and enslaved by the Islamic State. [25][26]In 2018, director Alexandria Bombach produced a documentary film called On Her Shoulders that featured secondnameplaceholder's life story and activism.[27][28][29]In 2019, secondnameplaceholder addressed the second annual Ministerial to Advance Religious Freedom[30] where she spoke about her story and the ongoing challenges faced by Yazidis nearly five years after the 3 August 2014 attacks and laid out a "five-point plan of action" to address the challenges they face in Iraq.[31][32] secondnameplaceholder was included among a delegation of survivors of religious persecution from around the world whose stories were highlighted at the summit.[33] As part of the delegation, on 17 July 2019, secondnameplaceholder met with President Donald Trump in the Oval Office with whom she shared her personal story of having lost her family members, including her mother and six brothers, and pleaded with him to do something.[34]
<h2>Personal life</h2>
In August 2018, secondnameplaceholder became engaged to fellow Yazidi human rights activist Abid Shamdeen.[35] They have since married.[36]Media related to firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder at Wikimedia Commons
(!!)Article(!/!)
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder Ali (Oromo: firstnameplaceholderi secondnameplaceholder Alii; Amharic: አብይ አሕመድ ዐሊ; born 15 August 1976) is an Ethiopian politician serving as 4th Prime Minister[1] of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia[2] since 2 April 2018. He was the third chairman of the ruling Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front and first Oromo to serve in that position[3][4] from the Oromo Democratic Party (ODP), which was one of the four coalition parties of the EPRDF.[5][6] firstnameplaceholder is also an elected member of the Ethiopian parliament, and a member of the ODP and EPRDF executive committees.He is the first Ethiopian and the first Oromo be awarded a Nobel Prize,[7] winning the 2019 Nobel Peace Prize for his work in ending the 20-year post-war territorial stalemate between Ethiopia and Eritrea.[8] However, during this time, political and ethnic unrest, and ethnic discrimination also increased in Ethiopia – marked by heightened episodes of violence, and armed conflict between government forces and TPLF forces. In June 2020, firstnameplaceholder, in concert with the National Election Board of Ethiopia (NEBE), decided to postpone scheduled parliamentary elections due to the COVID-19 pandemic. This move prompted criticism, especially from the opposition[9][10] and raised questions about the delay's constitutional legitimacy.[11]In November 2020, simmering ethnic and political tensions, as well as the attacks on the Ethiopian National Defense Force (ENDF)'s Northern Command exploded into the ongoing Tigray War between the combined forces of the ENDF and the Eritrean army against the Tigray People's Liberation Front, an ethnic party that dominated Ethiopian politics during a nearly thirty-year period marked by oppression and rampant corruption[12] before firstnameplaceholder came to power in 2018.
<h2>Personal life</h2>
firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was born in the small town of Beshasha, located near Agaro, Jimma, Ethiopia.[13][14][15][16] His deceased father, secondnameplaceholder Ali, was a Muslim Oromo[17] while his deceased mother, Tezeta Wolde,[18] was a Christian Oromo.[19] Despite some sources claiming that his mother was an ethnic Amhara,[20][21] firstnameplaceholder said in an Oromia Broadcasting Network interview that both of his parents are Oromo and asserted that "no one is giving or taking away my Oromummaa."[19] firstnameplaceholder's father was a typical Oromian farmer, speaking only Oromo, while Tezeta was a fluent speaker of both Amharic and Oromo.[19]firstnameplaceholder is the 13th child of his father and the sixth and youngest child of his mother, the fourth of his father's four wives.[13] His childhood name was firstnameplaceholderot (English: "Revolution"). The name was sometimes given to children in the aftermath of the Derg revolution of 1974.[13] The then firstnameplaceholderot went to the local primary school and later continued his studies at secondary schools in Agaro town. firstnameplaceholder, according to several personal reports, was always very interested in his own education and later in his life also encouraged others to learn and to improve.[13]
firstnameplaceholder married Zinash Tayachew, an Amhara woman from Gondar,[13][20][22] while both were serving in the Ethiopian Defense Forces.[23] They are the parents of three daughters and one recently adopted son.[23] firstnameplaceholder speaks Afaan Oromo, Amharic, Tigrinya and English.[24] He is a fitness aficionado and professes that physical health goes hand in hand with mental health and, as such, he frequents physical and gym activities in Addis Ababa.[23] firstnameplaceholder is a devout Evangelical Pentecostal Christian of the Full Gospel Believers' Church.[25] As such, he believes that he's "doing God's work" when promoting peace and reconciliation.[26]firstnameplaceholder is a Pentecostal,[27][25] born of a Muslim father and an Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church Christian mother. He was raised in a family of religious plurality. He, along with his entire family, is a regular church attendee, and firstnameplaceholder also occasionally ministers in preaching and teaching the Gospel at the Ethiopian Full Gospel Believers' Church. His wife Zinash Tayachew is also a Pentecostal who ministers in her church as a gospel singer. firstnameplaceholder frequently underscores the importance of faith and as a result, almost all faith communities are enjoying greater liberality in his tenure.[citation needed] The four main state television stations (ETV (Ethiopia), Walta TV, Addis TV and Fana TV) have been airing religious services almost every day since the COVID-19 pandemic.[citation needed]While serving in the Ethiopian National Defense Force, firstnameplaceholder received his first degree, a Bachelor's degree in computer engineering[28] from the Microlink Information Technology College in Addis Ababa in 2009.[29]firstnameplaceholder holds a Master of Arts in transformational leadership[28] earned from the business school at Greenwich University, London, in collaboration with the International Leadership Institute, Addis Ababa, in 2011. He also holds a Master of Business Administration[28] from the Leadstar College of Management and Leadership in Addis Ababa in partnership with Ashland University[30][31] in 2013.[29]firstnameplaceholder, who had started his Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) work as a regular student,[32] claims to have completed his PhD thesis in 2017[33] at the Institute for Peace and Security Studies, Addis Ababa University. He did his PhD work on the Agaro constituency with the PhD thesis entitled "Social Capital and its Role in Traditional Conflict Resolution in Ethiopia: The Case of Inter-Religious Conflict In Jimma Zone State" (Promoter: Professor Yelom[citation needed]). firstnameplaceholder published a related short research article on de-escalation strategies in the Horn of Africa in a special journal issue dedicated to countering violent extremism.[33]
<h2>Military career</h2>
At the age of 14, in early 1991,[34] he joined the armed struggle against the Marxist–Leninist regime of Mengistu Haile Mariam after the death of his oldest brother. He was a child soldier, affiliated to the ODP (Oromo Democratic Party), which at that time was a tiny organization of only around 200 fighters in the large coalition army of about 100,000 fighters that resulted in the regime's fall later that year.[24][13][23] As there were only so few ODP fighters in an army with its core of about 90,000 Tigrayans, firstnameplaceholder quickly had to learn the Tigrinya language. As a speaker of Tigrinya in a security apparatus dominated by Tigrayans, he could move forward with his military career.[24]After the fall of the Derg, he took formal military training from Assefa Brigade in West Wollega and was stationed there. Later on in 1993 he became a soldier in the now Ethiopian National Defense Force and worked mostly in the intelligence and communications departments. In 1995, after the Rwandan genocide, he was deployed as a member of the United Nations Peace Keeping Force (UNAMIR), Kigali, Rwanda.[35] In the Ethio-Eritrea War between 1998 and 2000, he led an intelligence team to discover positions of the Eritrean Defence Forces.[36]Later on, firstnameplaceholder was posted back to his home town of Beshasha, where he – as an officer of the Defense Forces – had to address a critical situation of inter-religious clashes between Muslims and Christians with a number of deaths.[24][37] He brought calm and peace in a situation of communal tensions accompanying the clashes.[24] In later years, following his election as an MP, he continued these efforts to bring about reconciliation between the religions through the creation of the Religious Forum for Peace.[36]In 2008, firstnameplaceholder was one of the co-founders of the Ethiopian Information Network Security Agency (INSA), where he worked in different positions.[13] For two years, he was acting director of INSA due to the director's leave of absence.[13] In this capacity, he was board member of several government agencies working on information and communications, like Ethio telecom and Ethiopian Television. He attained the rank of Lieutenant colonel[33][24] before deciding in 2010 to leave the military and his post as deputy director of INSA (Information Network Security Agency) to become a politician.
<h2>Political career</h2>
firstnameplaceholder started his political career as a member of the ODP (Oromo Democratic Party).[38] The ODP is the ruling party in Oromia Region since 1991 and also one of four coalition parties of the ruling coalition in Ethiopia, the EPRDF (Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front). He became a member of the central committee of ODP and congress member of the Executive Committee of the EPRDF – in quick succession.[24]
In the 2010 national election, firstnameplaceholder represented the woreda of Agaro and became an elected member of the House of Peoples' Representatives, the lower chamber of the Ethiopian Federal Parliamentary Assembly. Before and during his time of parliamentary service, there were several religious clashes among Muslims and Christians in Jimma Zone. Some of these confrontations turned violent and resulted in the loss of life and property. firstnameplaceholder, as an elected member of parliament took a proactive role in working with several religious institutions and elders to bring about reconciliation in the zone. He helped set up a forum entitled "Religious Forum for Peace", an outcome of the need to devise a sustainable resolution mechanism to restore peaceful Muslim-Christian community interaction in the region.[33]In 2014, during his time in parliament, firstnameplaceholder became the director-general of a new and in 2011 founded Government Research Institute called Science and Technology Information Center (STIC).[13][39] The following year, firstnameplaceholder became an executive member of ODP. The same year he was elected to the House of Peoples' Representatives for a second term, this time for his home woreda of Gomma.[40]Starting from 2015, firstnameplaceholder became one of the central figures in the violent fight against illegal land grabbing activities in Oromia Region and especially around Addis Ababa. Although the Addis Ababa Master Plan at the heart of the land-grabbing plans was stopped in 2016, the disputes continued for some time resulting in injuries and deaths.[41] It was this fight against land-grabbing, that finally boosted firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder's political career, brought him into the spotlight and allowed him to climb the political ladder.[24]In October 2015, firstnameplaceholder became the Ethiopian Minister of Science and Technology (MoST), a post which he left after only 12 months. From October 2016 on, firstnameplaceholder served as Deputy President of Oromia Region as part of the team of Oromia Region's president Lemma Megersa while staying a member of the Ethiopian Federal House of Peoples' Representatives.[42][43] firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder also became the head of the Oromia Urban Development and Planning Office. In this role, firstnameplaceholder was expected to be the major driving force behind Oromia Economic Revolution, Oromia Land and Investment reform, youth employment as well as resistance to widespread land grabbing in Oromia region.[44] As one of his duties in office, he took care of the one million displaced Oromo people displaced from the Somali Region from the 2017 unrest.[45]As head of the ODP Secretariat from October 2017, firstnameplaceholder crossed over religious and ethnic divides to facilitate the formation of a new alliance between Oromo and the Amhara groups, which together constitute  two-thirds of the 100 million plus Ethiopian population.[46]In early 2018, many political observers considered firstnameplaceholder and Lemma Megersa as the most popular politicians within the Oromo community, as well as other Ethiopian communities.[47][48] This came after several years of unrest in Ethiopia. But despite this favourable rating for firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder and Lemma Megersa, young people from the Oromia region called for immediate action without delays to bring fundamental change and freedom to Oromia Region and Ethiopia – otherwise more unrest was to be expected.[41] According to firstnameplaceholder himself, people are asking for a different rhetoric, with an open and respectful discussion in the political space to allow political progress and to win people for democracy instead of pushing them.[41]Until early 2018, firstnameplaceholder continued to serve as head of the ODP secretariat and of the Oromia Housing and Urban Development Office and as Deputy President of Oromia Region. He left all these posts after his election as the leader of the EPRDF.[49][42]Following three years of protest and unrest, on 15 February 2018 the Ethiopian Prime Minister, Hailemariam Desalegn, announced his resignation – which included his resignation from the post of EPRDF chairman.
Historically, the incoming EPRDF chairman is the next Prime Minister. The EPRDF chairman on the other hand is one of the heads of the four parties that make up the ruling coalition: ODP, ADP, SEPDM and TPLF.[50]Hailemariam's resignation triggered the first ever contested leadership election among EPRDF coalition members to replace him. A lot of political observers made Lemma Megersa (the ODP chairman) and firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder the front-runners to become the Leader of the ruling coalition and eventually Prime Minister of Ethiopia. Despite being the clear favorite for the general public, Lemma Megersa was not a member of the national parliament, a requirement to become Prime Minister as required by the Ethiopian constitution. Therefore, Lemma Megersa was excluded from the leadership race.[51] On 22 February 2018, Lemma Megersa's party, ODP, called for an emergency executive committee meeting and replaced him as Chairman of ODP with firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, who was a member of parliament. Some observers saw that as a strategic move by the ODP to retain its leadership role within the coalition and to promote firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder to become Prime Minister.[40]On 1 March 2018, the 180 EPRDF executive committee members started their meeting to elect the leader of the party. Each of the four parties sent in 45 members. The contest for the leadership was among firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder of ODP, Demeke Mekonnen, the Deputy Prime Minister and ADP leader, Shiferaw Shigute as Chairman of SEPDM and Debretsion Gebremichael as the Leader of TPLF. Despite being the overwhelming favorite by the majority of Ethiopians, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder faced major opposition from TPLF and SEPDM members during the leadership discussions.[52]On 27 March 2018, a few hours before the beginning of the leadership elections, Demeke Mekonnen, who had been seen as the major opponent to firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder, dropped out of the race. Many observers saw this as an endorsement of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder. Demeke was then approved as Deputy Prime Minister for another term. Following Demeke's exit, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder received a presumably unanimous vote from both the ADP and ODP executive members, with 18 additional votes in a secret ballot coming from elsewhere. By midnight, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was declared Chairman of the ruling coalition in Ethiopia, the EPRDF, and was considered as the Prime Minister Designate of Ethiopia by receiving 108 votes while Shiferaw Shigute received 58 and Debretsion Gebremichael received 2 votes.[4] On 2 April 2018, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was elected as Prime Minister of Ethiopia by the House of Representatives and sworn in.[2]
<h2>Prime Minister of Ethiopia</h2>
On 2 April 2018, firstnameplaceholder was confirmed and sworn in by the Ethiopian parliament as Prime Minister of Ethiopia. During his acceptance speech, he promised political reform; to promote the unity of Ethiopia and unity among the peoples of Ethiopia; to reach out to the Eritrean government to resolve the ongoing Eritrean–Ethiopian border conflict after the Eritrean–Ethiopian War and to also reach out to the political opposition inside and outside of Ethiopia. His acceptance speech sparked optimism and received an overwhelmingly positive reaction from the Ethiopian public including the opposition groups inside and outside Ethiopia. Following his speech, his popularity and support across the country reached a historical high and some political observers argued that firstnameplaceholder was overwhelmingly more popular than the ruling party coalition, the EPRDF.[4]Since taking office in April 2018, firstnameplaceholder's government has presided over the release of thousands of political prisoners from Ethiopian jails and the rapid opening of the country's political landscape.[53][54][55] In May 2018 alone the Oromo region pardoned over 7,600 prisoners.[56] On 29 May Ginbot 7 leader Andargachew Tsege, facing the death penalty on terrorism charges, was released after being pardoned by President Mulatu Teshome, along with 575 other detainees.[57]That same day, charges were dropped against Andargachew's colleague Berhanu Nega and the Oromo dissident and public intellectual Jawar Mohammed, as well as their respectively affiliated US-based ESAT and OMN satellite television networks.[58] Shortly thereafter, firstnameplaceholder took the "unprecedented and previously unimaginable" step of meeting Andargachew, who twenty-four hours previously had been on death row, at his office; a move even critics of the ruling party termed "bold and remarkable".[59] firstnameplaceholder had previously met former Oromo Liberation Front leaders including founder Lencho Letta, who had committed to peaceful participation in the political process, upon their arrival at Bole International Airport.[60]On 30 May 2018, it was announced the ruling party would amend the country's "draconian" anti-terrorism law, widely perceived as a tool of political repression. On 1 June 2018, firstnameplaceholder announced the government would seek to end the state of emergency two months in advance of the expiration its six-month tenure, citing an improved domestic situation. On 4 June 2018, Parliament approved the necessary legislation, ending the state of emergency.[55] In his first briefing to the House of Peoples' Representatives in June 2018, firstnameplaceholder countered criticism of his government's release of convicted "terrorists" which according to the opposition is just a name the EPRDF gives you if you are a part or even meet the "opposition". He argued that policies that sanctioned arbitrary detention and torture themselves constituted extra-constitutional acts of terror aimed at suppressing opposition.[61] This followed the additional pardon of 304 prisoners (289 of which had been sentenced on terrorism-related charges) on 15 June.[62]The pace of reforms has revealed fissures within the ruling coalition, with hardliners in the military and the hitherto dominant TPLF said to be "seething" at the end of the state of emergency and the release of political prisoners.[63] These hardliners, centered around TPLF chief Debretsion Gebremichael, had grown to deeply resent the leadership of firstnameplaceholder's predecessor Hailemariam (at times supposedly bringing him to the brink of tears), and had hoped to place a more assertive figure in the prime minister's office willing to "act with an iron fist", rather than a reformist.[64]An editorial on the previously pro-government website Tigrai Online arguing for the maintenance of the state of emergency gave voice to this sentiment, saying that firstnameplaceholder was "doing too much too fast".[65] Another article critical of the release of political prisoners suggested that Ethiopia's criminal justice system had become a revolving door and that firstnameplaceholder's administration had quite inexplicably been rushing to pardon and release thousands of prisoners, among them many deadly criminals and dangerous arsonists.[66] On 13 June 2018, the TPLF executive committee denounced the decisions to hand over Badme and privatize SOEs as "fundamentally flawed", saying that the ruling coalition suffered from a fundamental leadership deficit.[67]In 2018, to expand the free press in Ethiopia, firstnameplaceholder invited exiled media outlets to return.[68][69][70][71][72][73][74] One of the media outlets invited to return was ESAT (which had called for the genocide of Ethiopian Tigrayans).[75][76][77] However, since assuming office in April 2018, firstnameplaceholder himself had, as of March 2019, only given one press conference,[78] on 25 August 2018 and around five months after he assumed office, where he answered questions from journalists. As of 21 March  2019,[update] he has not given another press conference where he has not refused to answer questions from journalists (rather than reading prepared statements).[79][80][81]According to the NGOs Human Rights Watch, Committee to Protect Journalists and Amnesty International, firstnameplaceholder's government has since mid 2019 been arresting Ethiopian journalists and closing media outlets (except for ESAT-TV).[82][83][84][85][86][87] From the international media outlets, his government has suspended the press license of Reuters's correspondent, and issued a warning letter to the correspondents of both BBC and Deutsche Welle for what the government described as "violation of the rules of media broadcasting".[88][89][90]In June 2018, the ruling coalition announced its intention to pursue the large-scale privatisation of state-owned enterprises and the liberalization of several key economic sectors long considered off-limits, marking a landmark shift in the country's state-oriented development model.[91]State monopolies in the telecommunications, aviation, electricity, and logistics sectors are to be ended and those industries opened up to private sector competition.[92] Shares in the state-owned firms in those sectors, including Ethiopian Airlines, Africa's largest and most profitable, are to be offered for purchase to both domestic and foreign investors, although the government will continue to hold a majority share in these firms, thereby retaining control of the commanding heights of the economy.[93] State-owned enterprises in sectors deemed less critical, including railway operators, sugar, industrial parks, hotels and various manufacturing firms, may be fully privatised.[94]Aside from representing an ideological shift with respect to views on the degree of government control over the economy, the move was seen as a pragmatic measure aimed at improving the country's dwindling foreign-exchange reserves, which by the end of the 2017 fiscal year were equal in value to less than two months worth of imports, as well as easing its growing sovereign debt load.[93][91]In June 2018, firstnameplaceholder announced the government's intention to establish an Ethiopian stock exchange in tandem with the privatization of state-owned enterprises.[95] As of 2015, Ethiopia was the largest country in the world, in terms of both population and gross domestic product, without a stock exchange.[96]In May 2018, firstnameplaceholder visited Saudi Arabia, receiving guarantees for the release of Ethiopian prisoners including billionaire entrepreneur Mohammed Hussein Al Amoudi, who was detained following the 2017 Saudi Arabian purge.[53]In June 2018, he met with Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi in Cairo and, separately, brokered a meeting in Addis Ababa between the South Sudanese president Salva Kiir and rebel leader Riek Machar in an attempt to encourage peace talks.[97]Since taking power firstnameplaceholder has pursued a policy of expanding landlocked Ethiopia's access to ports in the Horn of Africa region. Shortly before his assumption of office it was announced that the Ethiopian government would take a 19% stake in Berbera Port in the unrecognized Republic of Somaliland as part of a joint venture with DP World.[98] In May 2018, Ethiopia signed an agreement with the government of Djibouti to take an equity stake in the Port of Djibouti, enabling Ethiopia to have a say in the port's development and the setting of port handling fees.[99]Two days later a similar agreement was signed with the Sudanese government granting Ethiopia an ownership stake in the Port Sudan. The Ethio-Djibouti agreement grants the Djiboutian government the option of taking stakes in state-owned Ethiopian firms in return, such as the Ethiopian Airlines and Ethio Telecom.[100] This in turn was followed shortly thereafter by an announcement that firstnameplaceholder and Kenyan President Uhuru Kenyatta had reached an agreement for the construction of an Ethiopian logistics facility at Lamu Port as part of the Lamu Port and Lamu-Southern Sudan-Ethiopia Transport Corridor (LAPSSET) project.[101]The potential normalization of Ethiopia-Eritrea relations likewise opens the possibility for Ethiopia to resume using the Ports of Massawa and Asseb, which, prior to the Ethio-Eritrean conflict, were its main ports, which would be of particular benefit to the northern region of Tigray.[91] All these developments would reduce Ethiopian reliance on Djibouti's port which, since 1998, has handled almost all of Ethiopia's maritime traffic.[102][100]Upon taking office, firstnameplaceholder stated his willingness to negotiate an end to the Ethio-Eritrean conflict. In June 2018, it was announced that the government had agreed to hand over the disputed border town of Badme to Eritrea, thereby complying with the terms of the 2000 Algiers Agreement to bring an end to the state of tension between Eritrea and Ethiopia that had persisted despite the end of hostilities during the Ethiopia-Eritrea War.[91] Ethiopia had until then rejected the international boundary commission's ruling awarding Badme to Eritrea, resulting in a frozen conflict (popularly termed a policy of "no war, but no peace") between the two states.[103]During the national celebration on 20 June 2018, the president of Eritrea, Isaias Afwerki, accepted the peace initiative put forward by firstnameplaceholder and suggested that he would send a delegation to Addis Ababa. On 26 June 2018, Eritrean Foreign Minister Osman Saleh Mohammed visited Addis Ababa in the first Eritrean high-level delegation to Ethiopia in over two decades.[104]In Asmara, on 8 July 2018, firstnameplaceholder became the first Ethiopian leader to meet with an Eritrean counterpart in over two decades, in the 2018 Eritrea–Ethiopia summit.[105] The very next day, the two signed a "Joint Declaration of Peace and Friendship" declaring an end to tensions and agreeing, amongst other matters, to re-establish diplomatic relations; reopen direct telecommunication, road, and aviation links; and facilitate Ethiopian use of the ports of Massawa and Asseb.[106][107][108] firstnameplaceholder was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2019 for his efforts in ending the war.[8] Today News Africa reports that a significant part of the international community consider it undeserved and question whether his Nobel Peace Prize ought to be revoked.[109]In practice, the agreement has been described as "largely unimplemented". Critics say not much has changed between the two nations. Among the Eritrean diaspora, many voiced disapproval for the Nobel Peace Prize focusing on the agreement with Eritrea when so little had changed in practice.[110] In July 2020, Eritrea's Ministry of Information said: "Two years after the signing of the Peace Agreement, Ethiopian troops continue to be present in our sovereign territories, Trade and economic ties of both countries have not resumed to the desired extent or scale."[111]The dispute between Egypt and Ethiopia over the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam has become a national preoccupation in both countries.[112][113] secondnameplaceholder has warned: "No force can stop Ethiopia from building a dam. If there is need to go to war, we could get millions readied."[114]After the murder of activist, singer and political icon Hachalu Hundessa ignited violence across Addis Ababa and other Ethiopian cities, firstnameplaceholder hinted, without obvious suspects or clear motives for the killing, that Hundessa may have been murdered by Egyptian security agents acting on orders from Cairo to stir up trouble.[115] An Egyptian diplomat responded by saying that Egypt "has nothing to do with current tensions in Ethiopia".[116] Ian Bremmer wrote in a Time magazine article that Prime Minister firstnameplaceholder "may just be looking for a scapegoat that can unite Ethiopians against a perceived common enemy".[115]Ethiopia is a country of various religious groups, primarily Christian and Muslim communities. Both inter-religious and intra-religious divisions and conflicts were a major concern, where both the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church and the Ethiopian Islamic Council experienced religious and administrative divisions and conflicts.[117][118] In 2018, he was given a special "peace and reconciliation" award by the Ethiopian Church for his work in reconciling rival factions within the church.[119]In June 2018, firstnameplaceholder, speaking to senior commanders of the Ethiopian National Defense Force (ENDF) declared his intention to carry out reforms of the military to strengthen its effectiveness and professionalism, with the view of limiting its role in politics. This followed renewed calls both within Ethiopia and from international human rights groups, namely Amnesty International, to dissolve highly controversial regional militias such as the Liyyu force.[120] This move is considered likely to face resistance from TPLF hardliners, who occupy much of the military high command.[121]Notably, he has also called for the eventual reconstitution of the Ethiopian Navy, dissolved in 1996 in the aftermath of Eritrea's secession after an extraterritorial sojourn in Djibouti, saying that "we should build our naval force capacity in the future."[122] It was reported that this move would appeal to nationalists still smarting from the country's loss of its coastline 25 years prior. Ethiopia already has a maritime training institute on Lake Tana as well as a national shipping line.On 7 June 2018, firstnameplaceholder carried out a wide-ranging reshuffle of top security officials, replacing ENDF Chief of Staff Samora Yunis with Lieutenant General Se'are Mekonnen, National Intelligence and Security Service (NISS) director Getachew Assefa with Lieutenant General Adem Mohammed, National Security Advisor and former army chief Abadula Gemeda, and Sebhat Nega, one of the founders of the TPLF and director-general of the Foreign Relations Strategic Research Institute[123][124] Sebhat's retirements had been previously announced that May.[125]A large peaceful demonstration was organized in Addis Ababa at Meskel Square on 23 June 2018 to show support for the new prime minister. Just after firstnameplaceholder had finished addressing the crowd a grenade was thrown and landed just 17 metres away from where he and other top officials were sitting. Two people were killed and over 165 were injured. Following the attack, 9 police officials were detained, including the deputy police commissioner, Girma Kassa, who was fired immediately. Questions were asked as to how a police car carrying attackers got so close to the prime minister and soon after the car was set alight destroying evidence. After the attack the prime minister addressed the nation on national TV unhurt by the blast and describing it as an "unsuccessful attempt by forces who do not want to see Ethiopia united". On the same day the prime minister made an unannounced visit to the Black Lion general hospital to meet victims of the attack.[126][127][128][129]In a speech to assembled Ethiopian ambassadors in January 2019, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder made a prescient remark regarding the sexual violence in the Tigray War. Alluding to the role of soldiers during the battle of Adua in 1896 and later, during the Eritrean war, firstnameplaceholder said: “This hasn’t been researched, but it’s obvious. From the battle of Adwa during the time of Menelik, to the later wars, many people from central Ethiopia – Oromos, Amharas – have been going to Tigray to fight. They were there for the war with Eritrea, and there’s been a military presence in Tigray for the 30 years since. So, if you’re wondering what the proportion of Oromo in Tigray is, leave it for DNA to find out. [Hilarity in the audience] It’s probably wrong to say this, but: those who went to Adwa, to fight, didn’t just go and come back. Each of them had about 10 kids.” [Loud laughter of the audience and applause].[130]
Jan Nyssen and colleagues consider this as “an open acknowledgement, even an endorsement, of military tactics and strategy that holds, as its central pillar, the use of rape in war”.[131]In the parliamentary session held on 16 October 2018, firstnameplaceholder proposed to reduce the number of ministries from 28 to 20 with half of the cabinet positions for female ministers, a first in the history of the country.[132] The new cabinet restructure included the first female president, Sahle-Work Zewde; the first female minister of the Ministry of Defense, Aisha Mohammed Musa;[133] the first female minister of the new Ministry of Peace, Muferiat Kamil responsible for the Ethiopian Federal Police and the intelligence agencies; the first female press secretary for the Office of the Prime Minister, Billene Seyoum Woldeyes.[134]According to NGOs like Human Rights Watch and NetBlocks, politically motivated Internet shutdowns have intensified in severity and duration under the leadership of firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder despite the country's rapid digitalization and reliance on cellular internet connectivity in recent years.[135][136] In 2020, Internet shutdowns by the Ethiopian government have been described as "frequently deployed".[137] Access Now said that shutdowns have become a "go-to tool for authorities to muzzle unrest and activism."[137] His government will the cut internet as and when, "it's neither water nor air" have said firstnameplaceholder.[138][139]On 21 November 2019, upon approval of EPRDF ruling coalition, a new party, Prosperity Party, is formed via merging of three of the four parties that made up the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF) and other five affiliate parties. The parties include the Oromo Democratic Party (ODP), the Southern Ethiopian People's Democratic Movement (SEPDM), the Amhara Democratic Party (ADP), the Harari National League (HNL), the Ethiopian Somali Peoples Democratic Party (ESPDP), the Afar National Democratic Party (ANDP), the Gambella Peoples Unity Party (GPUP), and the Benishangul Gumuz Peoples Democratic Party (BGPDP). The programs and bylaws of the newly merged party were first approved by the executive committee of EPRDF. firstnameplaceholder believes that "Prosperity Party is committed to strengthening & applying a true Federal system which recognizes the diversity and contributions of all Ethiopians".[140]
<h2>Civil conflicts</h2>
Several violence and crackdowns have been occurred since months after he appointed in office. It also concurrently brought radical change of liberation, including freeing political prisoners, freedom of media and acceptace of Permanent Court of Arbitration in relation to Ethiopian-Eritrean war. [141]On 22 June 2019, factions of the security forces of the region attempted a coup d'état against the regional government, during which the President of the Amhara Region, Ambachew Mekonnen, was assassinated.[142] A bodyguard siding with the nationalist factions assassinated General Se'are Mekonnen – the Chief of the General Staff of the Ethiopian National Defense Force – as well as his aide, Major General Gizae Aberra.[142] The Prime Minister's Office accused Brigadier General Asaminew Tsige, head of the Amhara region security forces, of leading the plot,[143] and Tsige was shot dead by police near Bahir Dar on 24 June.[144]Starting in June 2019, fighting in the Metekel Zone of the Benishangul-Gumuz Region in Ethiopia has reportedly involved militias from the Gumuz people.[145] Gumuz are alleged to have formed militias such as Buadin and the Gumuz Liberation Front that have staged attacks.[146][147] According to Amnesty International, the 22–23 December 2020 attacks were by Gumuz against Amhara, Oromo and Shinasha, who the Gumuz nationalists viewed as "settlers".[148]In October 2019, Ethiopian activist and media owner Jawar Mohammed claimed that members of the police had attempted to force his security detail to vacate the grounds of his home in Addis Ababa in order to detain him the night of 23 October, intimating that they had done so at the behest of Prime Minister firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder. The previous day, firstnameplaceholder had given a speech in Parliament in which he had accused "media owners who don't have Ethiopian passports" of "playing it both ways", a thinly veiled reference to Jawar, adding that "if this is going to undermine the peace and existence of Ethiopia... we will take measures."[149][150]The Hachalu Hundessa Riots were a series of civil unrest that occurred in the Oromia Region in Ethiopia, more specifically in the hot spot of Addis Ababa, Shashemene and Jimma, following the killing of the Oromo musician Hachalu Hundessa on 29 June 2020. The riots lead to the deaths of at least 239 people according to initial police reports.[151]The Tigray conflict is an ongoing armed conflict that began in November 2020 in the Tigray Region of Ethiopia, between the Tigray Regional Government that is led by the Tigray People's Liberation Front (TPLF); and the Ethiopian National Defense Force (ENDF). There are also several credible reports that the ENDF is being supported by special forces from Amhara, and a military alliance with Isaias Afwerki's Eritrean Forces.[152][153][154][155][156][157][158][159]
Hostilities between the central government and the TPLF escalated after the TPLF rejected the central government's decision to postponing August 2020 elections to mid-2021 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, accusing the government of violating the Ethiopian constitution.[160]The TPLF carried out its own regional elections, winning all contested seats in the region's parliament.[161] In response, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder redirected funding from the top level of the Tigray regional government to lower ranks in a bid to weaken the TPLF party.[162]The central matter of the civil conflict, as portrayed by firstnameplaceholder and as reported by Seku Ture, a member of the TPLF party, is an attack on the Northern Command bases and headquarters in the Tigray region by security forces of the TPLF,[163][164][165] the province's elected party; though such a claim is contested.The Ethiopian Government announced on 28 November 2020 that they had captured Mekelle, the capital of Tigray, completing their 'rule of law operations'.[166] However, there are reports that guerrilla-style conflict with the TPLF continues.[167][168]About 2.3 million children are cut off from desperately needed aid and humanitarian assistance, said the United Nations (UN). The Ethiopian federal government has made strict control of access to the Tigray region (since the start of the conflict), and the UN said it is frustrated that talks with the Ethiopian government have not yet brought humanitarian access. These include, "food, including ready-to-use therapeutic food for the treatment of child malnutrition, medicines, water, fuel and other essentials that are running low" said UNICEF.[169][170][171][172][173]During the Tigray conflict that started on 4 November 2020, the Amhara Region actively participated on the side of Prime Minister firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder. On 18 December 2020, looting was reported by EEPA, including 500 dairy cows and hundreds of calves stolen by Amhara forces. [174] On 23 November, a reporter of AFP news agency visited the western Tigray town of Humera, and observed that the administration of the conquered parts of Western Tigray was taken over by officials from Amhara Region.[175] Refugees interviewed by Agence France Presse (AFP) stated that pro-TPLF forces used Hitsats as a base for several weeks in November 2020, killing several refugees who wanted to leave the camp to get food, and in one incident, killed nine young Eritrean men in revenge for having lost a battle against the EDF[176]In his premature[177][178][179][180][181][182] victory speech delivered to the federal parliament[183] on 30 November 2020, firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder pronounced:
"Related to civilian damage, maximum caution was taken. In just 3 weeks of fighting, in any district, in Humera, Adi Goshu, ... Axum, ..., Edaga Hamus, .... The defence forces never killed a single civilian in a single town. No soldier from any country could display better competence."[184]On March 21 2020, during a parliamentary session in which firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder was questioned on sexual violence in the Tigray War, he replied: “The women in Tigray? These women have only been penetrated by men, whereas our soldiers were penetrated by a knife”.[131] There is a fear that the people of Tigray – and in particular the women – cannot live with what has been said, what has been admitted, and above all, with a Prime Minister who has endorsed a culture of rape. ”[131]Hence, the public image of a Nobel Peace Prize winner is being rapidly re-assessed by international media as increasingly grisly reports of atrocities emerge.[185] The US Secretary of State, Antony Blinken has been quoted as saying that had seen "very credible reports of human rights abuses and atrocities," and that "forces from Eritrea and Amhara must leave and be replaced by ‘a force that will not abuse the human rights of the people of Tigray or commit acts of ethnic cleansing’."
<h2>Political positions</h2>
firstnameplaceholder has been described as a "liberal populist" by the academic and journalist firstnameplaceholdere Teklemariam and the influential Oromo activist Jawar Mohammed. Alemayehu Weldemariam, a U.S.-based Ethiopian lawyer and public intellectual, has called firstnameplaceholder "an opportunistic populist jockeying for power on a democratizing platform."[186] On the other hand, Tom Gardner argues in Foreign Policy that he's not a populist, but more of a liberal democrat. However, Gardner acknowledges that firstnameplaceholder has "occasionally used language that can be read as euphemistic and conspiracy-minded", and might have "exploited the system's vulnerabilities, such as a pliable media and politicized judiciary, for his own ends."[186]
<h2>Nicknames</h2>
Getachew Reda, a senior official of the elected government of Tigray Region, mocked firstnameplaceholder secondnameplaceholder in a tweet on the day of the general elections, saying the Tigray Defense Forces had captured hundreds of ENDF soldiers as a gift for firstnameplaceholder’s coronation as the Naked Emperor of Ethiopia.[206]